Hello.
Whoops. More in peace here, so to speak.
More peace, better reflection on
how long you intend to speak.
That's right. Or stay, yeah. Yeah.
29 minutes and then, Oh,
Thank you. How you,
Oh, good man.
Excuse everyone.
Rest. I'll my,
a couple of spare cheer sort of.
Yeah, it's good. One, one.
There's this two over there, and there's these two are used.
Do you want grab these ones and move?
I still got, I'm sure you could bring some more people.
We've got the whole defense force. Yes. Entirely.
It's an impressive lineup. Irritable army, so to speak.
Standing room only,
just in my chair.
Did, were sitting at the book, but, oh, it's tilted.
Oh, it's terrible.
Alright. Good afternoon, minister.
Welcome along to the Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Committee for our annual review hearing for
NCDF and MOD.
Uh, we've got you good for half an hour today.
Uh, we appreciate you coming along, both on behalf
of the Minister of Defense.
I understand it's unavailable, but of course,
in your capacity as Associate Minister of Defense,
and also as Minister of Veterans.
So there may be questions across any
of those portfolios, as I'm sure you're aware.
So I'd like to hand over to you
for some introductory comments, uh,
and then we will get into questions.
Before we do that, can I also welcome, uh, chief
of Defense Force here, Marshall, Tony Davies, secretary
of Defense, Brooke Arrington.
Great to have you along as well as the wider team
as well. So, over to you minister.
Uh, Brilliant. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Good afternoon, team. Um, can I start where you left off
by acknowledging Chief of Defense Force, um, for NZDF?
Um, uh, all the personnel we're grateful for their service.
Um, uniformed and civilian, um, secretary of Defense to you
and your team, including MOD Folk.
Um, again, behind me in many cases, I'm grateful
for the work that they do for our nation.
Um, can I acknowledge, um, that there were a number
of remarks I found really pleasing
and gratifying, uh, made by members of this committee
and others in the parliament recently, uh,
with some legislation going through.
It was to do with, with workforce matters, uh,
notwithstanding that not all parties ultimately supported
the government's move in that regard.
I, I thought it was, um, gratifying that,
that there's a widespread acknowledgement across the house
of the importance of the work that our, uh, personnel do,
believing that the best opportunity for the session is
for me to, um, be in the hands of the committee.
Very much so, Mr. Chair, happy to hand back to you, uh,
for you and the team to, um,
take things where you'd like to go.
Um, and, and, and no doubt you'll call upon, um, CDF
and Secretary to include, make remarks at,
at the appropriate point as well.
Excellent. So, look, yeah,
I think the initial focus will be comments from the South
minister, and then we have scheduled a wee bit of time
after you leave to, uh,
delve into the further detail over the subsequent three
hours with the DF and I. Tiano, to your honor,
Thank you, minister, and just to, to acknowledge the, uh,
the, uh, comments on the minister support that
and all work that you do for all of us.
Just wanted to acknowledge that.
I wanted to start with questions around changes
to the Veterans Support Act, uh, 2014, um,
and what assessments, uh, you've made in terms of, um,
line of sight over the data, uh, given
that more people will be eligible
and the processes that you'll be advocated for,
either in terms of legislation
or process changes, uh, within, within the ministry and
or, uh, any thought that you have around the resources
that would be needed to actually support this.
Yeah. Th thank, thank you very much.
And, um, I should acknowledge as well present,
this is probably the appropriate moment, head of, uh,
acting head of the AIMS
Alexander And team, um, who
of course sit within defense.
Um, the, uh, recent litigation taken by the estate of, um,
or Gardner, um, has been one that the government has been,
uh, considering carefully, of course, um, for a start,
obviously we greatly respect the service of
and others, um, with whom he served.
And, and more broadly, of course, the veterans community.
Uh, we do need to understand the implication for the ruling
of the court in that matter, which I, I presume is, is part
of the background to your question.
Um, but if I can just pause on that briefly
before coming back to it.
The business as usual reality of, uh, veterans
who are defined as such under the Veteran Support Act, um,
making claims for the services
to which they're entitled under that legislation, um,
has been, uh, slow.
Um, historically it's been slow within the period
of the last couple of years.
Um, progress has been made by Veterans Affairs to,
to improve the processing times.
Um, partly that's been, um, a commitment
to better processes,
but it's also been, um, some additional funds through, uh,
not the last budget, but the previous one,
an extra $4 million over four years,
and an extra million dollars on top of
that in the last budget.
Um, so things have been moving in the right direction since
the time that the most recent, uh,
court ruling was made in relation
to the matter brought by Mr.
Gardner's whanau.
Uh, we've been considering as a government, uh, if,
and if so, what, uh, we should respond in some way, which,
you know, hypothetically at least could include
a legislative response.
Um, but we need to understand clearly what the implication
of, of the ruling was.
Um, at the risk of getting too deep into the weeds, uh,
particularly in a very complex legal matter.
The, the question is, of course, around the extent
to which the statements of principles are to be, whether
to remain the primary basis for determining eligibility, um,
and whether that is, uh, set at a threshold of, you know,
reasonable hypothesis or perhaps some other standards.
So we've, we are carefully considering
what the government response of any should be to that.
Have you got any timelines around you?
Yeah, um, um, if,
if the committee's interested in more detail, I might, um,
invite, um, acting head of VA to come
to the table and do that through you, Mr.
Chair. Um, but,
but I think I can say, well, Mr. Bryan makes his way up, um,
with the chair that Dr is very current,
very kindly currently, uh, bringing that, um, you know,
it has been progress made so far in terms of the number
of outstanding applications, uh,
and the commitment to, uh, receive
and acknowledge all new applications within a period
of seven working days, is
that very nearly a hundred percent mark.
So that's been pleasing notwithstanding
that we're still in the process of trying
to understand the extent
to which there might be more applications made as a result
of the, the litigation.
And, and therefore, to answer your question,
what additional resources might be required at that point.
But through you, Mr. Cheryl, invite, um, Alex to pick up
where I've left off, if there any further detail
with adding, at this point, I
Think, I think the minister's, sorry for, for the record,
uh, Alex Bru acting, uh, head
of Veterans Affairs New Zealand.
Uh, I think the minister's covered off
the situation broadly.
Well, there are two issues.
There's a historical backlog of claims currently
that's sitting at around about 1640.
Uh, it was down to around about, uh, 2000 at the end
of the 20 14, 20, uh, 2024,
2025 financial year, um, which covers the period
of this review hearing, um, by way of the implications
of the high court.
We have, uh, had actuArius model
that model essentially the, the impact.
Uh, and we've provided advice to the minister who's asked
for some further advice
that will be furnishing the government
by way of the implications.
Um, it's, it's a hard, it's a hard question
to answer in many ways,
because the scheme currently sits at 13% uptake.
So there's an awful lot of room within the scheme
for veterans to, to make more claims.
Um, so we are in a sense predicting what that, what
that claim pattern could be into the future.
The, the implications
of the high court ruling are quite clear.
It lifts, uh, uh, the amount of claims that we accept from
around 75% to 98%.
So that's quite a significant change,
and that that doesn't just present a impact by way
of claims that we have historically received.
It's across all the breadth of entitlements,
which span spouses, children,
and members of the whanau as well.
Mm-hmm. Right. Craig O'Connor. Yeah.
The, uh, so minister you,
you've mentioned a possible legislative response.
Is that in response,
ob obviously you've got a big liability,
has now gone onto the books.
Is that a result of a discussion with the Minister
of Finance that you need to now look at
how we you can limit our exposure?
Is that why you are doing that in, in other words,
alleged response might actually be looking at
reversing a high court decision,
Um, Or responding to high court
Decision? Yeah, I, I think
any diligent Minister for Veterans would,
um, be keen to understand the way
that the legislation should be interpreted.
And obviously we've got a disconnect between the way
that it's been interpreted since it was passed in 2014
until almost the present day.
So naturally, I'm considering what advice, uh, I should give
to fellow ministers, including the Minister of Finance.
Um, but the government is still currently considering
what options, uh, it, uh, may, uh,
feel necessary to take to provide the clarity.
Um, but as I say, we are still considering those.
So, and, and, and,
but of course, at the time that any such decisions are made,
they would be, um, by the government as a whole, including
with that cabinet collective responsibility.
So I think for me to single out any particular discussions
with specific ministers would be,
um, you know, inappropriate.
But one of those legislative responses could be
to reduce the balance sheet risk.
Well, I mean, there are a number of different
possibilities, um,
but I don't want to preclude any of those, uh,
or prejudge, um, particularly what may prove, um,
in the real world to be, uh, a greater or lesser problem
Than, than The actuarial analysis that Mr.
Brunt has identified, has now, you know, um,
um, been undertaken
Sub to Your Honor.
Yes. Just, just a, a quick sub, uh, sub on that in terms
of the sub, sorry, on the clarity, um,
what processes are you advocating with the,
with the various departments in terms of
how you figure out exactly how many people
that we're talking about, um,
and the processes that, uh, that are being put in place
to making, to make sure that all the different
branches are actually talking to each other
to actually get that accurate number?
Yeah. In that way, then you can determine, I think,
in my mind, um, how the liability is or isn't.
Yeah, I think it's a very astute question.
If I may say, um, I, I should just be really clear
for the record that, um, veterans Affairs,
which is the primary agency involved in these, uh,
or the sole agency actually involved in the, the delivery
of the services through the Veteran Support Act, um, has,
has been applying the law as interpreted
by the high court in, in its recent ruling.
So, um, it, of course, you know,
one can make educated guesses about the size of the cohort
based on our knowledge of
what deployments over the years have constituted
qualifying operational service.
But that only gives us the overall pool of those
who might be eligible to make a claim.
And within that, it's possible why I would say to know
with any certainty, even with the best efforts
and analysis, what proportion of the a hundred percent
of those available as compared with the 12
or 13% who currently make claims.
Uh, so I'm afraid to say that there's a lot
of uncertainty associated with that.
And of course, the, the range of figures to the extent
of the crown liability reflects that uncertainty.
I just wanted to come to the defense capability plan.
Obviously a major piece of work put out earlier this year,
um, just comes into the final quarter of the year in review.
We're really interested in some insights from yourself,
minister, in terms of the early, uh, rollout as it is
so far, uh, and indeed been perhaps merging into some
of the defense industry piece as well.
And then more recently, the defense
estate, which we'll go to.
Alright, well, of
Order, Mr. Chair,
I, I believe the first half hour was
For Veterans Affairs, not, no, it, it's second half, no,
the first half hours for the minister to cover all
of defense, including, and veterans grab a supplement after.
Thank, thank you. So the, the, the Defense Capital Plan,
um, is, uh, you will know Mr.
Chair and committee members was, um,
promulgation earlier this year.
Um, and it obviously sets out at a very high level what, um,
we consider the, uh, defense
and broader security needs of New Zealand
to be in into the future, including a commitment
to increase, uh, government spending on, on defense
to the 2%, um,
threshold over the period of the next eight years.
Um, within that, there are a number of key elements, uh,
and one was, um, estate and infrastructure.
Another obviously the key military hardware that we need.
So there's a program of work, for example,
maritime Fleet renewal, um,
and with all the big ticket items, be it platforms
or property, uh, of course as we go along, uh,
it's important that those are, uh,
well made decisions in accordance with business cases.
And of course, the people side too is, is hugely important.
So all those factors, um, are taken together, um,
and within, and, and,
but as relates to industry specifically, we know that, um,
defense needs a resilient, uh, supply chain with
as much local, um, content as possible, um,
for its own needs.
But also we see an opportunity for the economic growth
of the nation to ensure that our, uh, defense
or defense adjacent business, uh, providers
and suppliers can have a fair opportunity.
So, uh, looking at ways that we can make sure
that the taxpayer dollars that are needed
to be spent on the fence can also have a, uh, a,
a double benefit in the sense of, um,
scaling up new Zealand's, uh, opportunities for procurement.
Um, and if it's not big ticket items such as ship building
of, of a, you know, a larger, um, size of naval vessel,
for example, there'll be opportunities even so within that
to have New Zealand elements incorporated New Zealand skills
and employment opportunities as well.
Excellent. And so in terms of the initial decisions made
through DCP, obviously we've heard about the maritime
helicopter replacements, uh, as well as the, uh,
7, 5, 7 replacements, uh,
and then moving into some of the unc crewed systems.
Can you perhaps just give us a bit more of an update on
how that's progressing?
Yeah, I mean, it, it seems to me it's progressing well,
but, um, with a, with an obvious tension between wanting to,
um, acquire well, um,
and, uh, which, you know, should go without saying,
but, you know, in accordance with, um,
establish practic practice
and bearing in mind the huge stakes, um, of the game,
both in dollar terms for the taxpayer,
but also, you know, in terms
of our security needs on the one hand,
but also to be agile, by which I suppose, I mean quick
as much as possible on the other, um,
because, you know, we've, we've got a scenario where, um,
we have urgent, uh, defense spending needs, again,
be it infrastructure, property or people.
And, and so we need to have agility while at the same time,
uh, exercising the due diligence, due diligence you'd expect
for such, um, large scale purchases.
So, balancing those, uh, it seems to me that, um,
defense including, for example,
the maritime fleet renewal space, um,
in which I have the delegation from the minister herself,
uh, I know that the chief of Navy, among others, um,
are really, uh, keenly aware of opportunities, uh,
or the, the, the need to maximize opportunities to,
to make good decisions in that space,
but also to be a little bit creative.
I hope I'm not speaking outta turn, um, about ways
that a future naval fleets could include unmanned vessels
or vehicles, um, in addition
to the traditional blue water projection of, of forest
through, you know, large gray floating ships.
Supplementary. Yeah.
Um, just, just on, on the, on the DCP, um,
and just noting that with all of this $12 billion worth
of stuff, you're gonna need personnel,
and I, I said that you wanna bring on 2000 more people, uh,
as well, but, and also to hold onto to people,
and I'm, I'm thinking of some of those, uh, mid ranking
and senior ranking people, um, and,
and people that are coming on, on, on board.
Um, what are you advocating for in terms of addressing pay
as, uh, as a factor in both in recruitment and,
and retention, particularly given, you know,
people look overseas
and see that people are getting paid better over overseas.
What do you, what, what are you,
what are you advocating for?
Yeah, I, I think, yeah, I think it's a very, it is a,
a general question in New Zealand of
how well we can pay our people in the public sector.
And actually for, in the private sector too, of course,
the wealthier we are as a nation,
the more options we have in that regard.
I will say that pay is important for defense personnel,
but I will add that pay
and conditions taken together are an important
part of the picture.
So it's not just, of course, you know, the,
the take home pay important as that is, uh,
but also the way in which people serve.
And, and some of that goes to housing and other conditions.
Um, but more broadly even than that, there's a sense
of satisfaction that people have when they join as sailors,
uh, soldiers and aviators,
that they want to serve their country.
They join for the right reasons.
And, uh, part of the intangible appeal
of the defense force when people, uh, are recruited,
and I hope when they're retained, is
that they have meaningful opportunities within that.
So, uh, deploying people, uh, to, um, you know, dare I say,
theaters of conflict or other ways
that they can usefully contribute to the region,
be it humanitarian assistance, disaster relief, search
and rescue, um,
and other ways that the Defense force contributes
to New Zealand's, um, health
and wellbeing is, uh, you know,
also part of the, the picture.
So it's not as though pay is not important, of course it is,
but it's also part of a, a a, a bigger,
it's a piece and a bigger puzzle. Can,
Can I ask you then about the housing
of the $75 million allocated for new defense housing across,
or, um, and what are the issues on,
and what's happening? How's being fixed?
Yeah. The, the issues what, yeah, sorry. Yeah, yeah.
The, the issues in and, and,
and other, um, places where defense, uh, work, train
and live, um, are quite consistent.
And there, there's been historic underinvestment,
and that goes across successive governments.
It's not a politically partisan point that I make with that.
I think it's fair to say that over the years, um, it's,
you know, there, there has been work recently undertaken
to understand the problem better, but we are committed and,
and I'm pleased when we have support across the house
from others to, to increase,
To make sure that, Well, I mean, it'll be ongoing work.
And I think actually, to be out, to be honest, two elements
that have, um, uh, proven, um, thorny issues
for success of governments.
One is, of course, that the maintenance and, and looking
after the properties over time is such
that there is a large ongoing expense associated with that.
I think it's easy for governments
to look at the upfront cost of the, uh, CapEx, um,
as opposed to thinking about how the period of time,
the life of housing,
but also other infrastructure, it's going to need
to be funded and financed.
Um, but, um,
I also say that, um, it's, it's an important tool
for recruitment as well
as attention, because it goes to morale.
And of course, if a personnel are not, uh, happy
to remain in service
because there are limiting factors such as housing, uh, then
that's obviously a major issue.
So these things, you know, obviously need to be worked
through as a matter of time, so that the, the work
of the defense estate portfolio plan is announced last week,
for example, was to highlight that there are issues
that are understood, that are known
and that are prioritized within that.
Yeah, just picking up on the last couple of questions,
which I guess go to things like service conditions, um,
and the first one was about pay for, particularly
for uniform personnel.
And I, I kind of note the irony
because in, in the year in question, I think the personnel,
uh, funding was prioritized towards those in uniform,
which led to some industrial action,
and the defense force workforce bill, which ironically is,
is maybe opposed by that member.
But, um, I think it's good to see that.
But I wonder if you can speak to, and,
and you sort of touched on it,
I I guess it hints towards morale, retention, you know,
operations now compared to maybe
as we look back over the last five or six years.
What is your sense as associate minister speaking on behalf
of the minister of, of some of those,
I don't know if they're intangible,
but they're not just purely financial re re remuneration.
What, what's your sense as
Yeah, I, I think, um, and the member himself, um, as well
as the gentleman to his left would know that people, um,
wear the uniform with pride and,
and for intangible reasons, in addition
to those very tangible and practical
considerations for which they join.
Um, and I think metallic recognition is important.
Um, and I would say that's the case
for current serving personnel,
but also if we think about those who have served and,
and being respected and honored and thanked
and acknowledged for their service, um, in a way
that New Zealand, I think we haven't traditionally done
well, um, is also an important part of that picture.
Um, at the risk of strain, um, from, um,
the defense portfolio to the veteran's portfolio,
but acknowledging, of course, they connected
'cause the same, um, men and women, um, exist in one sphere.
And then the other, I think, um,
veterans recognition measures that we can undertake, um,
will be helpful for, um,
or the social license for want of a better phrase.
And the understanding more broadly of the New Zealands, um,
public about the importance of, of the service
of our personnel and,
and finding ways to appreciate that I think, uh,
will make people feel as though they're engaged in something
that's large to themselves that's worthy, um,
and is a part of a force for good, um, to use,
I think the hashtag that that social media, um, uh, accounts
of the defense force would wish me to use. But,
But can you give us a, the last couple times we've had,
we've talked about, for example, retention has being one,
one indicator, perhaps.
Can you give us a sense of retention now
as the trajectory we are on?
Is it, is, is this approach working?
How is it, say, compared to two years ago, five years ago?
Yeah, in in general terms, um, those,
um, the picture is improving.
Um, and if there's more detail on that, then, um,
it might be that the chief of defense force, um,
or any of us, uh, colleagues might wish to, um,
provide more detail than I'm able,
but certainly, um, anecdotally,
but also according to the data around retention,
the percentages are improving
that they're going in the right direction.
Um, but I would just add, um, number one,
we don't wanna be complacent about that,
but also, um, into the future when we need to expand, um,
our personnel numbers, of course, we've got
to do even better in terms of recruitment
and retention, so that we're able to build the force
to be able to deliver the effects, um,
as set out in the DCP.
So if you don't mind us pause in case the, anything c
that you would add to that.
Obviously with the government's intention
to increase defense spending to 2% by 2031,
and that's a steady increase.
Uh, a proportion of that is for not just capabilities, um,
asset management, um, maintaining old equipment, uh,
but it also is also for our, our people.
And part of that is pay, um, with the minister's indulgence.
I might just address a a couple
of the other points that've been raised here.
Uh, absolutely. Um, re remuneration is an issue for defense.
It hasn't just happened. It's been like this
for a long time, going back decades.
Um, several years ago,
we made a major adjustment in commitment with the help
of the government to, to bring, uh, pay up to, um,
between a band of 5% to, uh, on parity with,
um, civilian, uh, equivalent, uh, roles where we could,
noting there's a lot of specialist roles
in the defense force that aren't
replicated in the civilian world.
Uh, since that time, the gap has widened the game,
and it is an issue for us to address.
I think to be completely transparent, the facts
and figures are at the moment are that 24%
of our uniformed force, uh, is now, uh, 10%
away from that, uh, parity with, um, market.
But that is one thing that the remuneration, uh, project
that we have going on at the moment,
and we received funding for that, uh,
recently from government one, that's one of the eight, um,
lines of effort to,
to look at the rem Our whole REM system is very complicated.
It's been around for 30 years,
and it is very difficult for us to administer, um,
equally across the defense force,
but particularly as a strategic situation,
um, affecting New Zealand.
You know, the, the, the sharpening world we live in, uh,
changes and we have to look at how we, um, how we retain
people, particularly our war fighters.
Um, so REM is just one facet of that.
Uh, and we know there's work to do, but it takes resource.
We can spend what precious uplifts we get.
We can spend that on people, we can spend it on
old capabilities and fixing them up or new capabilities,
or we can spend it on our, our age,
very aged defense state and infrastructure.
There is not enough to go across everywhere
that would take hundreds of millions
of dollars, if not billions.
So we, we are very cognizant that it's an ongoing process
of prioritization to work out.
Does, does a little bit go on people, a little bit go on the
equipment and a little bit go on.
Actually conducting military operations,
you can't just buy us at all towards one.
If we spend all the money on people,
there would be no money left for operations.
Hmm. There would be no money left
for replacing aged equipment.
Um, and then the people would leave
because they're not, they're not doing,
they're not deploying and they're,
and if, you know, they're operating old ships, planes and,
and weapons and systems.
So it's a tough situation.
I think we're making the best we can.
We've got, you know, this is a major point
for our defense leadership team to consider day in,
day out, week in, week out.
And a lot of people behind me will attest
to this ongoing problem.
Um, just on the, uh, retention question, um,
attrition has come down
and it's stabilized now at just below 7%,
which is a significant reduction from a couple of years ago.
Um, whilst that's good, we are in the process again
of building up the hollowness
and the gaps left by all the people that left.
And that's another area of, uh, focus for us.
I think it wasn't just, um, adjusting pain conditions
that stopped that outflow.
It was a sense of purpose.
I firmly believe that's one
of the biggest retention mechanisms for people
that join the, join the Defense Force.
They, they, they, they joined to serve New Zealand
to deploy and to, they didn't join to get rich.
I, I'm not being flippant,
but quite frankly, um, that's,
that's not why you join, you joined for a purpose.
I think the investment in equipment, the commitment
to deployment and the sharpening external environment,
uh, is actually really helping us address the problem
as well as much just free.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, um, minister,
you've recently made an, an announcement, uh, in deport.
Uh, I wondered if, don't mind touching on a little bit about
that, and we know there was a lot of work that's led up to
that decision, but you've obviously come to a decision.
Yeah. And I wondered if you just wanted
to offer some reflections on that,
and I suspect we might get into a little bit more
of the detail of the appropriate stuff
now when that time comes.
Yeah. Perfect. Thank you for that.
Um, uh, I think it's been important, um, to, uh,
make some clear decisions about the defense estate.
And this was a point that was in my mind earlier to respond
to regarding defense housing.
And I, I missed the opportunity to do so.
Then I think over the years it's been the case
that successive governments have asked quite properly, um,
whether the basis are in the right locations, uh,
for our defense needs
and considering, you know, New Zealand population,
uh, factors and so forth.
Um, but of course, the, uh, uncertainty associated
with those questions has meant
that governments have been reluctant to invest in a place,
um, that wouldn't be represent a good investment if the base
were only to move in any case.
So in relation to Davenport, it's been, um, the subject of,
of query for many years, actually,
probably longer than the 25 years
from the time that I first joined.
But when I joined in the year 2000 Davenport Apple Base,
it was a, it was a rumor that,
that the base might be about to move.
Here we are in the year 2025 with a decision made
that it shall remain in place, which isn't to say
that other opportunities further north, for example, in, um,
don't exist because, you know, we can be, um, uh, um, able
to avail ourselves of other opportunities
that might be connected with, for example,
hypothetically a dry dock up there,
or the opportunity to maybe launch unmanned vessels, um,
in a way that doesn't require a traditional deep
water port for a Navy.
And, uh, and so making that decision, um, as a government,
um, I think will be helpful for the, um, the ability
and the confidence for the Navy
and defense more generally to invest in the resources and,
and literally fixing that which is broken there.
Um, and I do wanna acknowledge there've been questions asked
and work done over successive governments,
including recently, I think the member himself was the
minister that have helped to contribute to that decision.
I think it's a good decision. I'm grateful
for everyone who's worked, including previous
administrations as well as of course, um, you know,
defense personnel to, to come to that conclusion.
Excellent. All right. Time for Question with the minister.
Yeah. It's sort of, uh, around, um,
increasing stroking cap capabilities question.
Um, with this new technology coming on, on board two
and a half billion dollars with the helicopters
and looking at drones and so on
and so forth, what con, uh, what, um, conversations
or processes that has
or work, um, has, is the minister aware of
that's been put in place in terms of discussions that need
to happen with the Pacific, uh, with Pacific countries,
particularly if we are looking at unmanned, uh, craft,
like drones and stuff and heading out into
their air space as well.
So, um, what's the layout of there in terms of making sure
that we, um, uh, you know, respectful of international,
uh, agreements Yeah.
Stuff, that sort of thing, and I'm thinking
of like nuclear freelance, the importance of that, so that,
Yeah, I, I think from the point of view
of our Pacific Brothers
and Sisters, um, we need to act in a way
that's very respectful of their, um, key, uh, role
and their position as our Pacific, uh, family.
Uh, I know that there's a lot of interaction
that goes on at the defense level
and also at government level, um, with different ministers,
um, and in other ways that, um,
reflects the strength of that relationship.
It's actually really warm relationship, um,
at the South Pacific Defense Ministers meeting recently in
Chile, for example, on the other end of the Pacific, uh,
the, uh, Pacific nations that we often would think about,
and those that we work with,
with their own, uh, defense forces.
And of course, on behalf of those
who don't operate a defense force
and rely on, on their statuses, a realm nation to be, um,
you know, uh, included under our umbrella of protection,
that, you know, those relationships are important,
they will remain so and so, the closeness of the dialogue
and that sense of mutual respect
and understanding, I think is the key.
And then when they come to questions around, uh, lethality,
um, where you began that question,
but also in terms of, um, humanitarian assistance,
disaster relief, and the event of natural disasters,
fisheries protection, uh, stopping the flow
of illegal unreported, um, uh, movement of people
or drugs as the case may be all these matters,
we have aligned interests.
And, uh, i, I, I hope that I'm right to say that our,
our Pacific cousins are very pleased, uh,
that we are investing in defense in a way that will be
to the benefit of the region as a whole, as well as
of course within, uh, new Zealand's own, uh,
national security interests and of course, broader economic
and social interests as well.
Excellent. Right. Thank you very much, minister.
Appreciate you coming in this afternoon to join us, uh,
for the M-O-D-N-Z-D-F annual review
and your engagement on those topics. Thank
You very much, Mr. Chairman, to
the team for the opportunity as always, um,
you know, grateful for the constructive engagement
that this committee invariably provides.
Um, best wishes for the next,
um, stage of your consideration.
I wish Secretary Defense
and all the team ask all the best
for the next three hours. Thank
You. And
I'll go, go off, have a crawl, exercise four. So much
Cheer.
All right, members, now we'll move into the, uh,
detailed annual review hearing with NZDF and MOD.
Uh, welcome again, secretary of Defense,
chief Defense Force, uh, Alex Brand as well,
from Acting Head of Veterans Affairs.
We'll be starting with the veterans at the PS piece,
so invite you to join us at the table.
Um, we have three hours set down for the hearing today
to cover all the topics.
You will have received the agenda from the committee
outlining the eight points for consideration there.
Uh, so I'd like to hand over to you for some initial
comments and introductory remarks,
and then we will follow through the agenda.
Thank you.
To start. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair and members.
Um, I'll be quick,
although three hours seems an awfully long time
to be perfect, honest, so maybe I should go long
before asking him so you can all relax slightly.
Don't have to that up. Um, uh,
ministry's focused on the delivery
of the defense Capability Plan, which, as you know,
charts are path
to doubling the defense spend over
the next seven or eight years.
Uh, and as the secretary, my biggest role in many respects
and biggest risk is in the identification and purchasing,
and then passing to the NZDF of Capability Equipment kit.
So we've started reasonably well
where over the last financial year, we achieved a new fleet
of five Hercules entering into service ahead of schedule,
on budget into spec,
and the operational release
of the Anzac Frigate Systems upgrade, uh,
and the P eight Maritime Patrol aircraft, uh, uh, due
to enter
or perceive operational release in the
next few weeks, actually.
So those are three quite big ticket items,
which have been done well.
I should add that all of this is happening while the Defense
forces probably, uh,
the highest tempo it's been Operation Tempo,
it's been in generation.
So going back to the CDFs metaphor of kind of trying
to balance things, we're trying
to balance bringing in new capabilities while still using
old capabilities and, and doing a lot with them.
Which brings me to the capabilities in business cases
that we have in the pipeline in terms of the DCP,
and you've mentioned some of those already, Mr.
Chair in particular, the maritime helicopters
and the replacements for the seven five sevens, um,
and about $12 billion worth of purchase over
four years from being 25 9 billion of new money.
So it's quite a big bow wave.
We had a scalable and resilient procurement system known
as the capability management system,
which I think has proved itself, uh, robust.
It will be tested, but it has
so far proven itself robust over many years.
But we are looking to streamline
and strengthen that process,
and in fact, have taken some steps already this year
around governance and the quality of business cases, uh,
and the processes that we are following.
And I'm happy perhaps under the appropriate agenda item
to get into more detail on that if you wish.
We've also, uh, released in October,
the minister released the industry strategy.
That is, in fact, I think, a reflection of the fact
that we will not deliver this capability
unless we are doing it in some sense of partnership
with industry, both onshore and offshore.
The bow wave is so large that we need to work with industry
to deliver it.
At the same time, we want some of that $12 million
to come back to the coffers of the New Zealand taxpayer,
and that requires us for good reason
to also build a domestic defense industry.
My last point before I hand over to my, uh, colleague
and friend, the CDF is just
to note international engagement.
Um, ministry staff have taken over the course
of the year under review, have taken part in 80 bilateral
engagements and supported 32 ministerial international
engagements around the world or at home.
That's a, that's a significant number for a small ministry,
and actually for a small number of senior leaders,
including ministers.
But I think it reflects the fact that gone are the days
where we could be some relatively isolated enclave
in the Southwest Pacific.
If the world is coming to us, then we also have to go
to the world, uh,
and so we're setting about our business and doing that.
I'll stop there, Mr. Chair,
there's plenty of time for questions.
Excellent. Thank you. Um, thank you Mr.
Chair, for the opportunity to, uh, talk to you today.
Um, somewhat bizarrely, I actually enjoy the experience
of coming before this committee to, um, to open up about
how the Defense Force works
and how we deliver those outputs to vital for New Zealand,
as well as some of the challenges we we deal with.
I'll keep my remarks today focused just on key highlights
for the year in review, uh,
but also include some of the strategic context
that's shaping our future.
A major development this year was the release
of the Defense Capability Plan signaling government's
intention to increase the investment in the armed forces
and our national security.
This sets clear direction for strengthening the NZDF,
and it's been keenly, keenly welcomed by those
that serve our nation
and as well as our international partners.
We are focused on our core mission, which is training
to be ready for combat operations
that strengthen New Zealand's security, as well
as upholding the international rules-based order.
This is critical as the global environment becomes sharper
strategic competition, disruptive technologies,
cyber threats, uh, shaping our region.
And while New Zealand may feel geographically distant from
any conflict, the Pacific is increasingly a focus
of strategic competition.
Being prepared for how this may unfold is the only option
for the NZDF.
We've been exceptionally busy this year across all services
with operations exercises
and deployments demonstrating the professionalism, skill,
and resilience of our people.
For example, in August,
a challenging midwinter medical evacuation mission from
Antarctica was accomplished using the
new C one 30 J capability.
Very soon after its arrival with New Zealand landing on ice
and darkness to evacuate three people, one of which was, uh,
required critical care illustrates the complexity
and risk inherent in what we do.
These missions are never routine.
They demand precision, teamwork, careful risk analysis,
and they underscore why rigorous training is absolutely
essential in everything we do.
The Royal New Zealand Navy has made a very strong presence
across the Indo-Pacific region and beyond.
Frigate Taha returned in August after a multi-phase mission
and nearly seven months at sea away from New Zealand.
She operated in the Tasman
and the Middle East, the Indian Ocean,
and the tasks ranged from monitoring Chinese Naval Task
Group, conducting live firing in the Tasman,
supporting the Prime Minister's visit to India,
leading the multinational
counter-narcotics operation in the Northwest Indian Ocean,
and integrating with the multinational
UK carrier strike group.
The replenishment ship Altura began the year
with an Antarctic resupply mission
of 3.8 billion liters of fuel
to keep McMurdo running.
And then she joined partners from Australia, United States,
Japan, and the Philippines
to monitor un sanctions in North Korea.
And that ship is just returning, uh,
very shortly back to New Zealand, having been away
for eight months or nine months, actually now,
from from New Zealand, the Air Force
has been equally active.
The P eight Poseidon
and the King Years have conducted maritime surveillance
missions to detect illegal phishing, uh, transnational
and serious organized crime across the South Pacific.
And they have worked closely with Fiji and Tonga
and our New Zealand partner agencies, among others, customs,
police, and Foreign Affairs to get on top of
that nefarious activity,
our new C one 30 J Hercules
have picked up from the old ones.
They are a workhorse.
They support capacity
and resilience exercises across New Zealand,
around the Pacific,
and wider, including exercises like the very long, uh,
tropic twilight capacity
and, uh, resilience exercise in the Cook Islands.
Just held, just recently,
our NH 90 helicopters have demonstrated exceptional
capability during exercise.
Talisman Sabre in Australia, they flew a record breaking,
uh, over water distance flights from Australia
to Papua New Guinea
and back to New Zealand, proving their ability
to self deploy when required.
And the Army has focused on readiness, on interoperability
and supporting the rules-based order,
particularly in Europe, where our personnel train Ukrainian
forces to defend against Russia's illegal invasion
at home and abroad.
Major exercises have strength strengthened, uh,
key partnerships, uh, exercises like Diamond Strike,
which is a combined arms military exercise in Australia
that brought together the New Zealand Army
and the Australian Defense Force to integrate infantry,
armor, artillery engineers, logistics,
and many more specialties that enhanced interoperability
and war fighting skills of our people,
which are slowly rebuilding after the COVID attrition.
And then they went into Exercise Talisman Saver,
which is one of the world's largest multinational exercises
where the New Zealand combat team operated alongside 19
other nations and up to 30,000 personnel.
One of my priorities is, as CDF is
to strengthen across the entire N-Z-D-F-A more focused
military ethos and operational mindset.
The international environment is sharper
and less predictable, and so from our recruit schools
to our operational units
and to our headquarters, we must be focused, capable,
and ready to protect New Zealand's
interests wherever they are threatened.
In conclusion, I've only offered a brief sample of some
of the activities that the NZDF has undertaking
to protect New Zealand's interests
and to support the global rules
and to contribute to our vital relationships
with partner nations that are so important.
Let me please finish by saying that behind every one
of those operational missions are sailors, soldiers,
aviators, and our defense civilians who serve
with dedication and professionalism.
I also take this opportunity to acknowledge the families
who support them, often enduring long
absences and uncertainty.
So thank you for the opportunity for me
to share these reflections with you,
and I welcome the questions.
Excellent. Thank you both for those introductory remarks.
Uh, we'll come to the first section on Veterans Affairs.
Um, Mr. Brown, would you like to start with any remarks
before we get into questions?
I would probably make three broad remarks.
The committee to, to start off with.
Um, the, the, the first is just around the, the scheme
and where we are currently at in New Zealand
that you're probably well aware that, um, our,
our total number of veterans in New Zealand are decreasing
by way of attrition from World War ii, uh,
Korea and Vietnam.
Sadly, as those cohorts pass away, um,
the committee will be aware
that Veterans Affairs has had significant demand on its
services, which really come from
contemporary deployments from the 2000 onwards.
So Bosnia, uh, East Timor, um, uh,
and Afghanistan, those deployments are putting pressure on
services, given that Veterans Affairs was constructed really
in a peacetime model.
Um, we are seeing a change in the nature of the support
that those veterans, uh, require.
Uh, and I think the committee's probably well aware
of the increasing rates of mental health, uh,
and PTSD, uh, that we are seeing.
Um, we're also very aware
of the changing geopolitical circumstances
and the need to be able to support NCDH into the future
by way of being agile, uh,
and certainly dealing with volume.
Um, the second point I'd make is
that it's been well documented, the lack of data, uh,
around our cohort,
and we are still operating off an estimate of around 45,000.
Uh, a significant change was made last year
where we are no longer a scheme where veterans have to, um,
opt in if they want support, they have to opt out.
So at the point at which someone gets qualifying operational
service, uh, we as Veterans Affairs are notified,
they get an email, they're registered with the department,
and they get their veterans pun.
So by way of being a much more responsive, uh,
and agile service, that's been a significant advancement.
And I guess the third point is, um, I guess,
and it was touched on with the minister around discussions
around the legislation, um, that that's not
so much I'd necessarily say by
how much money should be spent on veterans.
It's more around what the government should fund, um,
and who should undertake that work.
Uh, veterans Affairs was never intended by way
of the Law Commission, and when it was set up
to be the sole provider of entitlements and services
and supports to veterans as part
of a cross government package that enjoys that, that
represents the public health system, um,
and the Accident Compensation Corporation.
So it's not the sense that if you change something in VA
that that doesn't have implications for other parts
of government, um, but as a collective package.
And that's why making the advice, uh, to the minister is,
is urgently more complex,
because it's not just that simply services
and entitlements aren't available, um,
because they're, they exist within other
parts of the system.
And so those are fundamentally questions for government
around the scheme as it moves forward.
And so those would be my opening remarks. Excellent.
Thank you for that. Uh, first
question, Tiano, to your Honor. Yeah, thank
You. Thank you for laying it out for
us.
Um, and I, I guess my, where my mind goes
to is it sounds like, uh, a piece
of work that needs to happen.
Uh, and I wonder if you could sketch for us
how you will intend on doing that.
And, and I hear what you're saying.
You're not, you are, you are not responsible for it,
but responsibility lies in, in a number of places.
So where's, where's the work to actually first of all, sort
of get some clarity on, on exactly what, what the data is,
uh, in terms of who's eligible or not, and so on
and so forth, and then where will the responsibility
and then also the timeframes around how that could of work?
Oh, I, I would say, I mean, I,
I think the responsibility is with the department,
uh, in that respect.
Uh, we, we have good estimates by way of those
to whom we believe have qualifying operational service.
Um, we have, we have had a change in the way
that the law, uh, is to be interpreted.
Uh, and as the ministers made clear, we are administering
that law as it stands now, uh,
and the funds to which we require
to administer those entitlements are on the balance sheet.
Um, the question for the government, um, is whether
that is the correct, uh, law, uh,
and whether those services
and entitlement should be delivered
through Veterans Affairs New Zealand, uh, recognizing
that there is a broader system at play.
Um, so, so, uh, uh,
we provide policy input
to the minister, and it's never binary.
Ministers always come back
and ask for further advice as do, as do other departments.
So it's hard for me to say, when does it start and,
and when does it finish?
But by actually, in terms of understanding the consequences
of the decision, those are fairly well known.
Uh, it's increased the liability by 1.4 billion.
Uh, it's increased, uh, acceptance rates of claims from 75
to roughly 98% of claims.
Uh, where, um, the, it's very clear that, um,
the, the intent of the VSA, uh, was to shift to a very,
uh, deliberate decision making process under
the statements of principles.
Uh, and this decision making steps as out of that, uh,
it places reliance on those statements of principles,
but it widens the interpretation of
what is a scientific family.
And so those are now questions for the government
to do, to determine.
Um, and just to follow up on that,
Um, what, what consultation
Has a good place with was impacted, um, veterans and,
and their families, uh, in terms of
how you work through this process.
Mm-hmm. Um, at, at, at the moment, these are questions
for, um, for, for minister by way
of commissioning advice from the department.
So in other words, we have consulted on the impact
with other government agencies, uh,
but there has not been public consultation.
And, uh, if and when the government make a decision, then
that public consultation would occur within
inside the constitutional norms,
but as of yet, a decision hasn't been made.
Greg O'Connor. Yeah. Thanks. Thank you.
Um, that policy advice that you are giving, does
that include advice around legislation which might
reduce the government liability
or the balance sheet liability?
I mean, obviously you, you, like all good policy advice,
you'll, you'll range.
Um, is that,
does it include advice on any potential legislation?
That's not what the advice fixes on it.
It's fundamentally around ensuring that, uh,
people receive the services and the supports that they need.
Um, that, that, that's funding that, that's first
and center about the advice.
And then it's around, well, who provides it and,
and how is that provided?
Uh, there is an element of,
or what are the fiscal implications of that?
But the fiscal implications are not driving the
advice in any way.
As I said. Uh, we're interpreting the law as it stands, uh,
and we have sufficient liability to, to cover, uh,
claims that are made.
The question is around the nature of, um, uh,
who makes those decisions into the
future and how they're made.
Well, so you heard the minister talk about legislative
options being looked at.
Is that something that Veterans Affairs
are not involved in at all?
Uh, we, we provide the minister advice, uh,
and uh, that advice can, uh, extend
to legislative options.
But, but the driver at the moment, by way of that advice is
what supports and services do veterans need?
Uh, what supports and services do service people need, uh,
and who and who provides those,
and who is best placed
to provide those right across the system, along
with interpreting the fiscal impact.
Um, but the fiscal impact, um, is merely
by explaining, uh, uh, the impact of the decision
to guide decisions that the minister may make, some
of which could well be legislative, some of which may,
may take another form.
Oh, so, so, so legislatively, so you're saying
that veterans affairs,
you are not involved in any legal work
that might in some way reduce the liability
of the, um, of future or even current?
No, I'm not saying that that is one scenario.
Well, that's what I'm asking of
Many, Of many that it could take.
Okay. Well, I'm specifically then,
what advice have you given to the minister about
how you might, how that they might reduce the
impact of the court case?
Um, the minister has not asked for advice on
how he may reduce the costs of the court case.
The minister has asked for advice on the implications, uh,
of the court case, uh,
and how best to support service people and veterans.
Uh, and, and by virtue of that, you know,
the fiscal impact is included, uh,
and options moving forward.
Uh, so that, that's, that's, that's the remit
that we've provided advice on.
I think it is worth noting Mr. O'Connor,
but the minister didn't say he was looking at
lead sort of options.
He said that he could be a potential hypothetic
legislative solution, not that he was looking at.
Yeah, I would've appreciate the opportunity
to ask the minister just that question,
but I'll, I'll do so on a written question afterwards.
That's fine. But just while we've got the,
that's important, we, sorry, Mr.
We've victory affairs here. It's good to ask that question.
If you want have questions, then you need to
No, no, that's just, we're just clarifying that cheer.
So thank you.
But it is important to not misrepresent comments
that the minister had made and is hearing.
Thank you. Okay. Any further questions on that?
All right, thank you. We'll move on
to the New Zealand Defense Force section, section four
and Unru.
Kira. Thank you very much. Um, andto again, this one
probably as I look at the structured agenda, Mr.
Chair s uh, two in particular, uh, it is
around the mani and the operational readiness.
Um, if, if it's, it's okay, Mr. Chair, thank you very much.
Um, a number of lessons here, uh, on the mani.
Uh, we've also heard much, uh, so far
during the session about that hollowness aspect.
Um, I'll start first of all, with respect
to the NUI about costs over the past year.
Um, uh, if you can offer any,
any insights into some of that cost and whether
or not there's been an assessment about any potential
further ongoing costs with the cleanup
or with any potential risks that have come from the cleanup,
uh, over the past 12 months.
Okay. Um, thank you.
So just around costs, um, I think total costs involve date
around 106 million.
That includes the, uh, the write off, uh, of the ship.
Um, that also includes the cleanup operation.
Um, and it includes a, uh,
a compensation payment to the government of, uh, Samoa,
which was administered largely through, uh, foreign affairs.
Um, on the topic of any further compensation to, uh, Samoa,
um, that's, um, a matter I'd refer
to foreign affairs at this
Point.
What about cleanup? Any need potential?
Do this, was there any work that foresees potential,
potentially more work, the cleanup
Work? The, the cleanup operation
was completed
to a very high standard, um, you know, e everything
that was accessible came off the ship.
Um, it was, you know, it was a substantial cost to do that.
The only questions that remain, um, you know, having,
having had, uh, I think two, two studies into the, um,
environmental effects on, uh, on that part
of the lagoon, they're saying there is
no, uh, pollution there.
So that's, uh, that's a very good outcome.
Um, the future of the wreck itself, um,
and having visited, uh, samo myself to, and, and,
and that region, you know, within a couple of months,
you know, sea life growing all over the wreck,
now the rec has been assessed
as stable in its current position.
But again, this is a decision for the Samoan government,
and we will, um, we will fit in
with whatever their, whatever their wishes are.
My hope is that the, the wreck is left to remain in place,
but again, a, um, a decision for the Samran government.
So those are the only outstanding issues around Mani.
Gonna still on Mani? Yeah. Still on Mannu personnel.
And, and this will be my last question on this one. Yeah.
Got on Mani as well. Yeah. Okay. K.
Um, look, uh, the, about the readiness
and we accept that the Mani is not to be replaced, um,
is part of the personnel, uh, training
and development with, uh, a mind to the recommendations
that were in the report about some of the shortcomings
or challenges with respect to personnel
and the operation of the Mani.
Um, what work has been done since
that report was released in order to make sure that we can,
uh, address those matters that were released in the report
or recommendations that were
Made? Um, ab
absolutely.
So, uh, just noting that when the Court of Inquiry
commenced, uh, very quickly
after the sinking, um, we were very quick to put our out,
put out our publicly, our preliminary, uh,
findings on the causes.
Um, and I would say, you know, around 90% of the,
of the findings were completed that point.
The, the remaining time spent
by the inquiry was looking more at system-wide,
um, aspects.
Um, we, that, that court of inquiry was complete, um,
earlier this year as the Chief Navy
and the Minister of Defense, you know, appeared three times
to talk to New Zealanders publicly
about what the findings were.
Um, we didn't wait to that point
to then start implementing recommendations.
We were getting after shortcomings
and gaps right from the get go, you know, within days of,
um, it becoming obvious to us, uh,
what had actually caused the, the sinking.
So we haven't, we haven't waited.
We've, we've got after that as fast as we could.
And there's four main lines of effort there
around assurance, training, um, orders, um,
and, and a whole bunch of things that fit under those.
Um, the other thing we did immediately was look at those
immediate lessons and look at the rest of the, of the fleet,
and to some extent, uh, air Force
and, uh, army as well, to look at
what lessons could be taken from the Mani sinking.
It is a huge piece of work for, um,
for our Navy to do.
We are standing up different, um,
regulatory pieces within the Navy.
You know, these all come with extra people,
extra resource, extra time.
Um, but it's absolutely essential in my, in the view
of myself and the, and the chief of Navy.
Um, we've had a, um, a look from a health
and safety perspective at, um, risks.
You know, let's face it,
that everything we do in the Defense Force has, has risk,
uh, associated with it.
And so, uh, applying applying risk across everything we do,
you know, there will need to be some
and has been some adjustments as a result of Nui as well
that come back to readiness and training.
Um, the final part is obviously the, uh,
disciplinary, uh, process.
And as little I can say about that, while that's, uh, still,
uh, ongoing at this stage, uh,
but various phases of it have been completed.
As with all of these things, uh, very important to step
through legally very carefully.
And, and we have to be methodical and careful as we do that.
But that's yet to complete.
Very good. I supplement your question. Yeah.
Uh, I, I was wondering, um, uh,
and maybe you can't answer it, um, uh, just around the,
the compensation part, whether you
provided any advice to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
or about that particular amount, um,
'cause for me, the number had just appeared, um,
and there was no kind of reference as to how that, how
that would got to, Sam was in the middle of an election.
So it, it seemed to me to be done by officials
and not necessarily by ministers.
So I wonder if you, if you give us any light about whether
you provided any advice about exactly where
that number came from, or
I can't, uh, give you any advice about
how the numbers arrived at.
I, my advice was about
where the money is coming from internally and in defense,
and what we'll need to stop, uh, in order to, to, to make
that contribution.
Well, to be clear on that, defense didn't furnish
that advice where, where the, we are the funding source.
We are not the government's advisors on the quantum Yeah.
That came from foreign ministry and through that process.
So that's a question best corrected.
I mean, I guess my, my question is, is, you know,
there's environmental damage.
There's other sort sorts of things, so would need to get
that information from someone, um, in terms of
what a potential compensation package would look like.
Um, so yeah, trying to get some clarity on
That. But best
a question, best directed at that
agency. Honor opinion.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, the final one sort
of sounds technical and hoping you'd be able to answer it,
and I see pka sitting at the back there,
who might have a view on this,
around why a multi-year appropriation
wasn't considered better in use of any
of the costs affiliated or associated with the Nui.
And the reason I'm the,
and I got school, but that was about it.
But when I looked through, well, I look, when we look
through the numbers and a lot of the others who continue
to advise on these matters, it, it looks like
an anomaly in the way that the money's counted
for the nui here.
I I'll start just by saying, um, I'm not an expert in the,
um, in the, the way, uh, big the big rules, uh, are applied
around, um, uh, finances.
I rely on people who are in this room with me around that.
Um, I do note that, um, we did end up
with a technical breach in our, um, annual audit report
around that very topic of, of how we apply, um, off
of the cleanup and the cost of the sinking,
and even the compensation resulted in a, in a breach for us.
And, uh, we take advice from the office
of the Auditor General about, um, about
how we can improve in those, uh, areas very seriously.
And we, we will get on with that.
Um, first thing is doing everything we can to,
to prevent a re a recurrence of the very sinking, uh,
that's absolutely fundamental,
but the, the financial treatments of the cost of it, um,
I'm have to lean on my experts in the room.
If you need anything further, I'm going
to have a crack at it, but they can throw something at
me if I, I might understand it better.
I get seven four calculus, I think,
I think under the Public Finance Act.
Compensation is formally defined,
is a, is a one-off payment that is brought
to charge in a financial year.
So it's, it's under the Public Finance Act
that can't actually be a multi-year appropriation.
It's a, it's a one-off payment.
I'm looking around desperately. That's great.
Goes, I've learned something.
The appropriation that ter, uh, can continue to be used for.
Sorry, can you just come up to the microphone? Sorry.
Sorry, sorry.
Good afternoon. Uh,
Bridget Marks the Chief Financial Officer
of the New Zealand Defense Force.
Uh, the new appropriation that has been set up, uh,
for the response to the Mani can continue to be used, uh,
over multiple years.
We just don't have multi-year funding.
Uh, but, um, when,
and if, uh, funding, uh, is approved
for future response activities,
there is an appropriation there for that expenditure
to now be incurred against.
We all have something today supplementary.
Tim Costley, um,
CDF Sue, just one for you on.
Um, I'd really like to ask about the crew of Mani,
'cause it will have, um, you know, had a
hundred odd sailors on there that were keen to get 7 77
that were keen to get back to, um, work and, and go
and produce the outputs for this country.
And I know last time we spoke there was talk about, um,
recommissioning, that's the right word, oga.
I'm just wondering, um, where things are at in terms of, um,
those sailors being redeployed to other ships,
or is there a new ship that's at seen the fleet,
or where does that say?
Yep. So firstly to the, uh, the crew
and noting that we had, um, we had people on board,
other agencies and international partners who were on board
that, um, endured that horrendous, uh, night.
Um, you know, part of our process is continuing to check up
with the agencies and the countries that they belong to, um,
to, you know, it's a very significant thing.
They went through, uh, the same for our people.
Um, and once we went through the Anoa process,
uh, back home and helping them adjust to what they had been
through, uh, the Navy looked at how
to redeploy those people into other areas of the,
of the Navy, either other ships
or other jobs, noting that in any part of the defense force,
we are well short of, um,
agreed establishments.
So those people were gratefully swallowed into the system.
Uh, and, um,
and, you know, I would've to ask the chief of Navy where all
of 'em are now, but I, I think across all parts of the Navy,
um, just in terms of, um, it, you know,
having a number of ships that we can deploy into the region
for any range of tasks is important, but was a big loss.
And so the next thing was to reach and,
and look at, um, HZS Otago
who had been tied up
and put into what we call care and custody.
So a, a state of, um, hiatus.
Um, it's quite an effort to bring that ship back out.
It requires, uh, tens of millions of dollars, you know,
when the ship has been sitting still for, for so long.
Anything that's complicated of that size, um,
before you put it back to sea, has to have quite a bit
of work and, and money spent on it to, to do that.
Just in terms of that process,
I think it was gonna take about a year to, to bring back.
I, if you're happy for me to check with Chief of Navy,
I can get a, get an update on that.
Please. See,
you might have other questions for him as well.
Koto, for the record. Uh, Karen Golding, chief of Navy,
yes, we're activated, uh, Otago.
And, uh, we are planning to have
that force generated next year
to be out on operations in quarter three next year.
Okay. And, and that's pretty, to me,
that seems pretty remarkable that in the midst of a,
a really challenging international scale event to be able
to pivot and, and get something else to see and, and,
and to protect those options,
whether it's into the southern ocean of the Pacific, um,
sounds really encouraging.
Well, we, we have a huge maritime area to, yeah,
to cover it simply requires vessels.
We're using satellites.
We are using UNC crewed systems, um,
on, on the water.
The defense capability plan has got built in
un crewed air systems as well.
We're constantly looking at innovative
ways of covering that.
But you can't be a gray hole in terms of presence, in terms
of, particularly around transnational, uh,
serious organized crime around illegal fishing.
You need the presence on the water as a marathon nation.
And so that's why it's important to bring Otago back.
Sorry, can you just clarify that quarter three
of the calendar year or the financial year?
Uh, calendar year. Okay. Thank you.
Back to your personnel question.
Yes. Um, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, we've used the term, the hollowing out over
a number of sessions here in this committee.
Uh, is, oh, is the NZDF offering programs
for those to return back into those ranks?
Or less a rank? Is it still going on?
Uh, and can you give us any insight into the
success or otherwise fact?
Yep. So in terms of holiness,
and I, I must admit, I don't like the word hollowness.
I think it needs to be more specific,
but it does reflect the fact
that when we had massive attrition, a lot of the people
that left were from the center that hollowed out the,
the experience levels in the center
for all intents and purposes.
So there's a range of, um, options in play to replace that.
It's not simply just about opening the recruiting gates
and training people from below.
That takes time. It takes money.
Um, so opening the door
and encouraging those left back in is very much one
of the areas where we're targeting.
We. Same with, um,
international, uh, recruiting.
If we can bring in someone who has experience at that
supervisory level from one of our partner militaries, um,
from the Pacific, uh, from anywhere, we,
we very much welcome them.
We just need to be very cognizant of not, um, uh,
not making ourselves, um, a big target for the UK
and numbers that they can't cope with or with Australia
or with Canada or any of our other prime, uh, parties.
Uh, similarly with, um, the Papua New Guinea,
uh, defense force.
His majesties aren't forces of Tonga
and the, um, Republic of Fiji military forces.
We don't, we we, we have to be very mindful of, um, well,
we welcome them to come and join our Navy.
We have to be very mindful of the, of the offsets
that incurs for
That. Any significant
interest on,
Sorry, That significant interest from other countries?
Yes, there are. There and there always has been.
I mean, um, if you, in the uk, um, you know, just,
they view New Zealand as a wonderful country to come
and live in, uh, a country that up, up
until recently has been remote
and distant from, from many of the world's conflicts.
Uh, but that's all changing,
as I said in my opening remarks.
But nevertheless, the chance to go
and serve with, um, another military on the other side
of the world, either on a, a temporary basis as an exchange,
or to come and put that uniform on,
on a more permanent basis, I think would be very attractive
for it to come to a country like New Zealand.
Yeah. Tiana,
To your honor, completely different question.
Just sort of a earlier comment you made around, um, uh, kind
of getting ready and, and, and this kind of thing.
And I, and I wonder if you have an, an overall plan around,
um, uh, personnel on one hand, getting the right people to,
to who are able to, to do all the stuff with the,
with the new stuff that you're procuring, um, along with,
uh, along with the stuff that is about that,
that you're about to purchase as well.
What, do you have a, do you have a, do you have a plan about
how that works in terms of the ebbs
and flow of people that are coming in, uh,
the personnel gaps that you will have?
Because if you're dealing with new,
new technology, right? Mm-hmm.
Yep. You're gonna need new skills
and new people. So what's the, what's
The, so we re-skilling some of our own people
for the new capabilities is one thing,
but the, the Fed's capability plan also has growth built on
over the next 15 years.
Uh, we're growing by about, uh,
two to two and a half thousand.
Um, we would love to grow more than that.
It's just not affordable.
Um, the, the other, uh, pieces that
as the environment worsens
and the, um, prospects of New Zealand being involved in, um,
in operations at the upper end of what we are here to do,
um, is increases for each passing year.
We also need to be mindful of the need to,
to do more operationally.
It's not just about the new capabilities,
but being out there flying more, sailing more,
deploying more, uh, more peacekeeping, more, um,
climate change responses
and natural disasters, more responses
to transnational crime and illegal fishing.
All of that stuff simply requires that we need
to increase our outputs,
and that requires more people as well.
So it's replacing hollowness, it's growing
to meet the task demands,
and it's also growing to meet the new capabilities that, um,
that we need as part of the defense capability plan,
where we can, we try and innovate
and use technology to minimize the number of extra people,
new ships that are being built around the world generally,
mostly have fewer people in them.
Our C one 30 Hercules is a good example.
It has less crew on board.
Same with our P eight Poseidon, which replaced the P three,
the crew size shrunk.
Um, what we are seeing now is
that in areas like information handling, all the data, um,
that comes from our sensors
and making intelligent decisions outta that, um, the,
the cyber attacks that we're facing day after day, um,
and handling, um, lines of investigation on all of those,
that all takes people, you can't just replace that with,
you can't flip a switch and replace that with ai.
Are you able to tell us
how many cyber attacks they come from?
Yeah, absolutely. So broadly speaking, I think this,
you've made this public before,
but, um, there are about a thousand, um, uh,
in, in the, in the cyber domain.
There are about a thousand hits on our system per week, uh,
in any given month.
We are investigating the more serious end of that,
and that's about 15 to 20 per month
that we are investigating.
It's not just those that are on us.
We share with partners what they're experiencing.
And so we are looking at, you know, where,
where they make adjustments to their systems and resilience.
Um, we will, we will learn those lessons as well.
But, uh, it's a vast amount.
It's not just the NZDF, it's, uh, it's all kinds of agencies
and critical infrastructure in New Zealand.
The whole thing around cyber is, um,
is fundamentally, uh, critical.
We can't afford to have a, a breach there.
If I can add to that, uh, to the member sitting
behind the DCP is, is a vast amount of work,
um, relating to workforce and the state and infrastructure
and introduction of service new capabilities.
So that, it's kind of a, an iceberg metaphor, if I can.
I know it's a bit hackney, but it's true
that the DCP sits at the top of it.
But actually the bulk of the work sits well below in,
in detail plans and GaN charts.
The trick is, as you imply, is the kind of,
if I can say the crossover profile,
which is when the existing force shrinks down
and the new force grows,
and trying to find the right for each capability, not just
for the NZDF as a whole, but for each service,
and then for each service,
each capability inside that service.
When's the point when you lose some something old
and get something new?
And making sure you've got your training right for that,
but also your infrastructure, which is why, for example,
if you go to o, you're seeing a, an extraordinary piece
of national level infrastructure
around the new hangar for the P eight.
So that was being built at the same time
as the p eights were being built.
Um, similarly down in Burnham, you've got new, um,
warehousing, you've got new logistics buildings,
you've got new storage for the, for the Bush masters.
So that was being built when the Bush masters
were being bought.
So we're trying to bring all of this into common space.
The additional trick, which the CDF has alluded to
is trying to manage the operational tempo with
rigorous purchasing of capability,
because the very people that he needs
to run smart operations are also the very people we need
to tell us what a good bit of kit looks like.
And so at the end of the day, in a small service, we have
to be quite thoughtful about chasing talent
and being quite deliberate about where this person sits.
Are they in a sense, are they with me at the moment
in an integrated, you know, project or program team,
or are they with CDF
because he needs them to lead a squadron or, or,
or lead operations?
And, and, and, you know, we are active in,
in looking about the deployment of talent.
Next question from Costley.
Um, thank you. Uh,
and I'll say the sort
of broader defense capability plan you touched on till we
get to that section, but I just wanted to pick up, um,
penny, he's questions around personnel.
Um, and I'd like to ask about PERS
and then maybe into the operations if, if there's time
for the operations, but, um, cdi,
if you spoke about the number of personnel you'd like
to grow by, that's obviously over the next sort of seven,
10 years as the funding increases.
And, you know, you can't magic up everyone overnight.
I appreciate that. Um, I'm just wondering as a start point,
how are the current numbers coming in the door?
How are you going, being able to fill up recruit courses
and actually getting people in,
which is probably just maintaining it to start with.
But if you wanna start with that
and then I'd like to ask about growth that comes from that.
Okay. Um, so the DCP growth, um, by two, two
and a half thousand is predicted over the next,
um, 15 years.
15, I mean, that's, that's on what we know today.
So as I said
before, the way the world's changing, I predict that
that number will increase significantly, um, due
to the environment changing strategic competition
and increase conflict, we're also regrowing, uh,
the force back to where it should be
to fix the, the hollowness.
Um, and we are also, um, growing
to take on new capabilities.
Space is a good example.
Um, very much a contested area up there, um, with the chief
of Air Force stood up
and the minister recently opened in, um, FNU PI 62 Squadron,
the Space Squadron, which is very, um, very,
has very humble beginnings,
but you have to start from somewhere.
There's 14 people in that squadron doing a lot,
but they, they weren't new addons.
They had to come from other parts of the,
of the, uh, air Force.
But we will have to all have
to backfill those other areas somewhere.
But I think we need to be realistic that
as we grow these new capabilities to adapt to modern times,
it simply does require more people.
What do you stop doing on a defense force that is already,
uh, quite thin in terms of our capabilities compared
to contemporary partners overseas?
Um, you know, something has to give,
or we have to simply increase, uh, the numbers, um,
just in terms of recruiting.
So if I, I would just start
by saying there are more people applying
to join than we have funding to take on.
That's a limitation that goes back to funding spread across,
operating across people, across new capabilities,
across a range of things.
So if we could, we would open the gates more
and simply grow from, from the recruits and,
and grow up from the bottom.
If I look at the numbers, we,
we are receiving more applications than we have
in the proceeding two years.
And my data only goes back two years.
But for instance,
we had 9,706 applications received
from New Zealanders last year, whereas in 22, 23,
we, we had under 8,000.
So that's a sizeable increase, nearly 2000.
If you look at, um, how many passed the initial assessments
to come in, the, uh, percentage that that passed,
that assessment is within of last year.
But it has increased. Um, those
that then passed the interviews, it's higher again, um,
that which indicates we're getting some very good
candidates apply.
Um, and those that are actually, uh, attested, um,
however, is is slightly down.
Um, so if we talk about attestation rate of, of all of those
that apply, um, to those that actually sign up
and commence their training, um, it's
around 7%, seven
and a half percent, which is comparable to previous years.
Um, but we are, we have got more applicants,
uh, flying to Kimma.
So you've got good people in your generally filling up all
the spots on your initial, um, training courses.
Yes. Is that across all services? Sorry? Uh, yes. Yeah.
And, and, and is there a plan that says, okay, well we've,
we're gonna have to grow by whatever it might be,
150 euro 15 years?
Mm-hmm. Um,
and I, I tend to agree with you, I think that
that number will only need to increase is, is there a plan
that says if we need to grow by, let's take an extreme view,
a a thousand people in the next two years
because of X, Y, Z, this is
how we're gonna do it and this is how we
Yeah. So we, as part
of our workforce strategy, um,
and there are eight initiatives in there.
One of those is looking at the workforce.
We need, um, over a number of years from now going out to,
I'll have to check the CPO,
but I think it goes out maybe 10, 15 years. CP uh,
The strategy was four Years. Okay.
Lines up Tcp, right?
Um, so part of that is managing those we need to grow
for the DCP capabilities.
Part of that is filling gaps we already had.
And part of that is, um, growing to be able
to deliver a higher rate of operations.
So there is, there is a significant amount
of work that models that.
Um, again, it's very, very heavily reliant on funding
that we receive.
And that funding has to be spread across
the increased cost of operating.
Yeah. Um, the increasing cost pressures that we face,
just the cost of doing business, um, as well
as additional operations.
So what's the current maximum number
of recruits you can train annually?
Um, I think we could,
we could open the gates further if we
had the available funding.
Part of the workforce savings program was to shift from,
um, a higher number of civilians
that we had grown over steadily over the last 10 years
and reassigned some of that funding to, uh,
new recruits from the bottom.
And we have, I have graphs here that show
that we are effectively doing that as our
civilian numbers come down to where they were previously.
Um, we are able to use that funding to transfer 'em
to increasing our recruiting of
uniform people effectively re rem militarizing
the defense force.
So, sorry, it's not just a question of funding though,
because you can chuck as much money
as you like if you don't have the quality people
to train the recruits.
Mm-hmm. Yep. And you can't, so we are stretch in terms
of our, what's the anticipate
or what is the current maximum
training capacity you have annually?
Um, well, we have a target.
We have a target each year, um,
and we are meeting our targets, CPO
or just below, I think we were at 90% of our target.
You some bearing in mind some of those drop off
during the station phase
or in the initial stages of training as well.
So, sorry, with that DCP growth plan, two to two
and a half thousand over 15 years,
that's about 150 a year are straight lining their growth.
Is that dent anticipation? Yeah.
Um, if you, if you're happy, I can show you.
Um, I guess where I'm getting to with that is to maintain,
based on your current attrition rates, existing numbers,
and you need 620 recruits a year
to retain or to maintain levels, plus 150 on top of that.
So you'd have to be training 770.
Um, how much additional capacity is there over that?
I'm, I'm really keen to get an estimate of a number.
If you can't provide it to us today,
maybe you would come back to us after the fact,
but I'd like to note on what the capacity is.
Certainly, I'll come back to you.
I'll just, just allow me to go back to this note again
and show you, um, our recruiting numbers.
Um, so our target was, um, for,
for the financial year in review that we're talking about,
our target was 812 and we had tested, uh, 700.
Um, I'm hoping to look that number higher
and we'll come back to you with
what our targets are in the out years.
Note that down please, team.
But, um, this graph here, uh, I don't expect you to be able
to see, but what it,
what you're generally looking at is the black line
that is the uniform people in the defense force.
This, this period on my right is 2012.
This line goes out to today.
So you can see that we were growing the number
of uniform people in the defense force.
This is when COVID happened.
This is the massive attrition we had during COVID,
and we dropped over a thousand people.
And you'll see now that that line is increasing.
Um, it, it is on the increase.
And those little ups and downs you see in there are the
individual recruit courses of each service.
So we measure this monthly, the yellow line,
and it's on a different scale,
but this is the number of civilians in the organization.
You can see from back in 2012, a steady increase
of civilians up to this point, uh, which reached a peak,
um, in, uh, the middle of last year
as we started this review period.
You can see what was, what was that about?
Why did it peak Like that? Why did it peak?
We allowed it to peak because uniforms were leaving.
Oh, okay. Uh, and we needed people to come in
and fill the gaps left by uniforms
that we couldn't recruit during COVID.
And this reduction, the sudden reduction in civilians,
that, that, that means now we can increase our recruiting
rate of, of uniforms to do a number of things, fill the gaps
and, uh, grow for the DCP.
Um, CP, do you want to come to the table
and just in case there's additional questions,
you're already in position, I'll welcome, uh, Jacinda Fe,
chief People Officer to the table.
Is there anything I've said, but it's not a hundred percent
correct or you want to add to
That feels career limiting?
CD Um, what I, what I would add is that,
uh, we're doing significant work on our recruitment system.
Uh, and so, um, well, we currently, um, have been able
to recruit, um, around 700 in a financial year.
Our goal is to expand the recruitment system
so we can recruit 1500 in a financial year,
and as well as increasing the capacity in the recruitment
system, but also looking to reduce the time to recruit.
Uh, so, um, when the work started on this two years ago,
we were, um, uh, up at around 300 days
to recruit someone into the defense force,
which is unacceptably long.
Um, we are now down below 200 days
and, um, our goal, I hope this time next year I can sit
and tell you that we're down at 90 days.
So significant work is, is going into, um,
the recruitment system so that we can, uh,
expand the pipeline.
Can you give us some insights into how you're able
to achieve that 100 day
Reduction? Yeah. Um,
a lot of it is, um, utilization of technology
that we already have.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and, um, and making better use of that.
There has been, um, almost a forensic, uh,
review of our, of our entire end-to-end recruitment process.
Um, so what we found was we were losing, uh, a lot of people
through the process, partly
because we were taking so long, um,
and we weren't, we were putting more effort in for the bulk
of people at the coming in the front end
of the recruitment process.
And actually we get more being for our buck,
focusing on those people who stay in the process for longer.
And so there's, there's a shift, uh, and focus.
There's no, there's no rocket science
or silver bullet to what we've done.
It's been, uh, a lot of business improvement work.
And and 800 was the figure
that you had space for this year?
700 and tested
Eight, uh, 800 was the target
800. So 800
is what you had funding and instructors and uniforms
and beds and everything for.
Okay. So there is actually scope in the system
to increase. Yes.
Yes, there is to today.
And that target, um, that target fluctuates
quite a bit year on year.
Um, into your, to your earlier question about will growth be
a, a linear, uh, event?
I, I don't believe it will.
I think, um,
we will recruit more in some years than in others.
Um, and we're undertaking an exercise at the moment
to look at our next four years of, um, intakes,
uh, and growth to, to plan that out.
But the 1500 Mr.
Chair, if we can, the 1500 target, what,
there'll be a few pieces of the puzzle that need
to come in to that.
And I, I appreciate that might not be next year's target,
but it'll be, is it instructors, is it,
is it physical buildings that you need
to house all these recruits in?
Is it, is it the next stage of training on that you need
to then have trades for them to go to?
What, what are the pieces that you need to get in place
to be able to grow at that sort of rate?
It, it is all of those things.
And just to be clear, 1500 is the target
that we've set ourselves for the capacity
of the recruitment system at.
That's, that 1500 is not connected to, um,
Trade training or To service growth to,
to a training target.
It's, it's a target that is specific
to the recruitment system.
Um, but all of the things that you've mentioned, the number
of instructors, accommodation, uh, uh,
all all of those things, um, availability of trade training,
uh, the, those are all factors that, um, that feed, uh,
the targets that are set each year by the single
Services. Sorry, can you just come back
to that?
You, you say in 1500 is a recruitment Yes.
Target, but not a training target.
Correct. What the difference, so 15, why
Would you recruit someone and not train them?
Uh, so 1500 is the target that we've set ourselves
for the capacity of the recruitment system.
Um, I think that 1500 will be above, uh, the training target
that we will have each year.
So we want to be able to create capacity
to recruit more than we need.
That's, so does that,
So that that is not the limiting factor
On Correct. That
is not the limiting factor.
And I'll just to add to that, um, Mr.
Chair, that, um, my expectations
and my advice to our, to my leadership team is that we,
we need to be prepared to raise
that number significantly higher than that.
If the situations dictate just as our Forbes did, um,
around each world war
or each major conflict, um, we, we need to be able to raise
that twofold, fivefold, tenfold in a very short space
of time that's gonna be incredibly challenging
and will need us to implement a whole range
of different measures to try and achieve that.
And that's really my fundamental question is if,
if the next significant thing happens in the world
that leads to that fivefold tenfold increase Yeah.
Is required that we just physically need people in uniforms,
is it getting those civilians into a uniform?
Is it getting, you know, 18 year olds in the door?
I was reading about World War II
where they had little radio programs
where people would study at at night to get up the myths
to become a air crew,
but it's probably all online these days.
But, you know, are there those kind of,
but there were some pretty extreme programs to get people in
and get quickly out the door on the front line.
And I guess I'm saying what's the,
what's the current thinking about how we posture?
Definitely we, we need to go back to lessons of history
and what worked back then, what didn't work back then, uh,
as well as what new, um, innovations we can do.
But this will require not, um, assistance of New Zealand
and New Zealand society
and government like you, we've never had before.
Yeah. There are gonna have to be some, some drastic changes
and some big thinking about how we accomplish it.
Um, you know, I think a little early
to start looking at the details of that, uh, at the moment.
Um, but certainly, you know,
we are dusting off the history books
and looking at what, what New Zealand had to do to survive
and grow its military back in 1938.
Can, can I supplementary? Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, can you help me understand why it takes 200
draft days to recruit someone?
Yes. Because it does seem like it all fills a very
seven months and seems like a lot.
So part, part of the answer to the question is
that we have fixed dates when people can start training.
Mm-hmm. And so that, that elapsed time, um,
takes that into account.
I see. So, so if you start the recruitment of, um,
an officer, and there is one intake per year, if,
um, someone starts the recruitment process in February
and the March and is in January, that's one, that's one
of the reasons why, why that takes so long.
Um, but it's not the only reason.
And so that's the one we can't control the others,
we, we can control.
And that's what we've been getting after,
and that's why that target is coming down.
That's why that average is coming down.
So it's an average number. Okay. Okay.
And you had a question. Sorry, did you have a sharp
On the Yeah, just, uh, uh, on just, um, uh, uh,
I wonder if you've done any analysis on,
on the other aspects as well.
So, I mean, I hear what you're saying
around being combat ready and,
and all of these other sorts of things,
but the, that role of providing humanitarian aid, um,
disaster relief, climate resilience,
and you talked earlier about helping people out down there,
task that's important, those important roles.
Yeah. Um, what work are you doing to make sure that
that is not being overshadowed?
Um, and how does that, how does that reflect,
for example, and, and
No, The way that you train and stuff like
That. Absolutely. The,
all of those roles we undertake are built
into our planning systems and our annual operations.
What I would say though, that those things
come about because of our core role,
which is preparation for combat.
So all of those things we do in terms of disaster relief
and support, monitoring, fishing, uh, monitoring,
transactional crime out on the oceans
and things, support of Antarctica,
those are secondary skill sets that are only there
because of our core role
and purpose, which is training for military operations.
Um, just could I just go back
to the, if it's okay, just back to the
previous question just around our workforce strategy.
Okay. This is a major piece of work, which has been going on
for years in the workforce strategy
and its current iteration.
Iteration is being factored to take the DCP into account,
but there's, there's nine lines of effort in there
that the government, uh, recently gave defense funding
for $26 million of funding to progress these things
that might, um, help the committee
to understand just what those are.
So scalable workforce, which is
what we've been talking about, uh, designing the model
that can scale, scale up
the total remuneration program.
We talked about that earlier.
Modernizing the NZDS learning system, um, the,
these are all in progress, by the way, the workforce
planning capability, uh, rebooting the recruiting system,
which Jacinda, uh, talked about earlier.
Induction reforms, uplifting the induction process
to build a central, a central purpose, um, as in scoping
retention measures is a major line of work
position management and, uh, the broader spectrum of service
and employment, um,
understanding the requirements around that.
So that might just help you understand
that there is a whole range of things,
new things we are doing to make sure that we are fit for,
fit for today, uh, capable today and for fit for tomorrow.
Thank you Nel from Greg.
Just on, on that particular, so obviously
with technological requirements of the forces now, um,
how much proactive recruiting are you doing to up,
I suppose that capability?
Sorry, how much brought
Up the proactive recruiting
around specific recruiting perhaps into the, um,
technical institutes into the university sector
to make sure you've got a workforce that
actually is reflective of the technical advances, then the,
um, well, and, and warfare and, and defense.
Yeah. Um, so absolutely that's, we've been building
that in for a couple of years now,
and we came to the recognition some time ago that it's,
you're not just wanting people that can operate, uh,
sophisticated weaponry, ships, flight planes, um, you know,
nowadays you are looking at a, um, a range of people who
to operate our information systems, our cyber systems,
our space systems aren't your traditional battlefield, uh,
warriors that we've had in the past.
So that has been, uh, factored in just in terms of, uh,
actual lines of effort, in terms
of reaching into those institutions you talked about.
Um, that's something our recruiting, uh, agencies
and our chief people officer manage on a daily basis.
If you need more, I can invite Jacinda back to the table.
Right. Thank you. Uh, we'll come to Dan Kirkpatrick.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my question, um, as always,
every year is about operation respect.
Yes. Um, and I note that there was some, um,
further work done, um, between July and September Yeah.
On Operation Respect. I'm just
after, I guess an update on where that's at.
And then my second part to my question, which I might
as well ask now so that you can deal
with it at the same time, is about how, um,
how you are monitoring, uh, progress
or improvements in that space.
Okay. Um, so firstly, I, I spoke to you back in, uh,
midyear session around Yes.
Off respect, and I gave you some sound bites of the report
that we had received at that point.
Mm-hmm. Uh, that was, that was one of two audits
that have been conducted in the last year.
Um, the second, second audit, which is, um,
just in the stages of being completed.
And that report will be
provided to you by the office
of the Auditor general in February, I believe mm-hmm.
In time for next, uh, the next committee.
But that has looked at, um, primarily, um,
leadership commitment to op respect as a, as a program.
Um, I've seen, uh, initial draft results of
that audit and it's pleasing to read the,
what they're reporting there.
But as with all of these reports, there's,
it's highlighted areas that we can improve and, uh, work on.
Um, and so we will embrace those, uh, when they come
through, but as to go through that iterative stage of, um,
looking at the, the draft report
before it gets finalized in February.
Mm-hmm. Um, some
of the questions you've asked me previously about resourcing
for, um, respect, and my answer is still consistent.
All of our programs across the entire NZDF have had to be,
uh, prioritized, uh, to, to feed one at the expense
of o others is, um, something we try and avoid.
So our respect, we have spent a lot of time trying
to optimize the funding that we do have to get the best,
to get the best out of it.
And I think we've, we've made some good changes,
which I'd be happy for either, uh, CPO
or, um, our director of health to, to speak about as well.
Um, the second part of your question was on, um, I'm sorry,
the monitoring, the, the monitoring of progress.
Yes. Um, ongoing monitoring progress progress. Yes.
So that was looked at in this, in this order.
And I think, um, the way we, we handle the data
and look at data was one of the areas we need
to, to improve on.
Mm-hmm. And so once we've got the finer details of that,
we'll, we'll progress that in the next tranche
of changes to our respect.
Primarily the phase we're in at the moment has, has been
to embed the strategy
and, uh, leadership buyin at all levels
of the, of the Defense Force.
Thank you. Yep. Good.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, TDFU brought up 62 Squadron.
Yes. And it's an exciting,
and for some parts quite unknown
what the future looks like, of course.
Um, one can only expect that it will require funding.
Um, so this is a two-pronged question.
The first one is, since it's establishment,
what works been undertaken to make sure
that taxpayers are getting bang for buck
and making sure that it's tied to a deliverable
or something that New Zealanders can hand on heart, say,
that's a great investment into our protection
and our security interests.
And the second one to make sure that the work
that NZTF does in that space, uh, doesn't overlap
because I see it's a multi-agency approach,
and I'm, I'm aware, MD have some kind
of involvement here Yeah.
To make sure that people, uh, can see
where the dollars are going and
who's actually doing the maintenance.
Okay. Um, thank you for the question.
Um, firstly, um, there are as well
as 62 Squadron, there is a number of other, um, activities,
programs, forums that we're involved in
that we've discussed at this committee in the past as well.
One is the joint commercial operations, which is there
to look up into space
and see, um, effectively have a look at, uh, same
as we're monitor traffic on the ocean
and what's, uh, what, what's happening where
around illegal fishing or transnational
crime movements and things like that.
The same happens, uh, up in space.
Um, the second is, um, CSPO
or the combined, uh, space operations.
Our Chief of Air Force is at that forum at the moment
with other, uh, like-minded, um, um, heads of space
or heads chiefs of Air Force.
Um, and that is more a forum to make sure
that people are playing by the rules.
We are conforming to a, a range
of international regulations on space,
but more importantly, trying to get a handle on what nations
who might not be fully compliant
with some of that are actually doing.
It's very important to understand that.
Um, the, the last one is, uh,
the multinational force operational Olympic defender, um,
which is about maintaining space to domain awareness again,
but monitoring irresponsible behavior in space
and supporting if it's to deter a, um,
irresponsible behavior in space by, by other nations.
Um, so, uh, that a lot is happening in, in that space,
um, because space is absolutely fundamental.
Uh, if you look at the proliferation
of the reliance on space by all nations,
particularly a maritime nation like New Zealand,
out in the middle of nowhere, um,
it's absolutely fundamental.
It's not just there, there for monetary purposes,
but it's there for the betterment of New Zealand.
And our prosperity, just
as our undersea cables need protecting.
So there's the, the capabilities rely on space.
A lot of that work is, is done through 62 Squadron.
That's part of the reason why we, uh, set it up.
Um, other areas of interest are
around the assets that we have in space.
We're part of the wideband global satellite system,
although we don't own around own satellite.
We, we paid for a portion of that satellite.
Uh, and then there's, um, two NZDF payloads
that were successfully put into, into space.
Um, these are very modest, um, small, um,
uh, capabilities there to, for a couple of reasons.
One is to demonstrate at very low cost the ability for us
to build our own, um, functional, um,
uh, capability for space.
And we started very small with both of those.
And so they're up there. The second one is to make sure
that if we do need to put our own, um,
capabilities into space, we can exercise the systems through
various, um, uh, launch partners to be able to get our,
our payloads up and should we needed, um, I can only,
you know, I I, I can't imagine
what life in New Zealand would be like if
various nefarious actors were able to disable all
of the capabilities in space.
You know, how that affects everything that's critical
to New Zealand, including banking, our finances,
our trade, and Mr.
Chair, if I can supplement the CD's, answer
MB essentially set strategy and policy and domestic law
and acts as a regulator for payloads.
Um, although defense does not fall under those regulations,
but that's essentially M B's role.
And the Defense Force is an operational, um, set
of activities with a very narrow kind
of defense focus working with defense partners.
So I think the two entities are demarcated. Okay.
Um, supplementary Tiana. Yeah.
Thank you for that Was kind of, um, part
of the question I was asking as well around that Lily
with the space agency,
but I was wondering are there other connections
and how do those, how do those kind of connected with what,
how you guys implement your advice?
Like, for example, with the SIS
and DCSB, are there other agencies which actually help
to set the policy direction in terms of how you work, um,
uh, manage or implement space initiated activities?
I, I think that question around regulation of, um,
of the framework that controls
or permits space activity in New Zealand, uh,
would either go to the minister of space or, or MB itself.
MB do consult with Defense Force from time to time
in terms of, um, in terms of payloads, um, where,
where necessary if there's a national security,
um, aspect to it.
But, um, yeah, I
Think a potential challenge though
that it's the same person that is the same person.
So it's, there's just kind of different roles.
Yeah. Same person. We don't have a role in regulator.
Yeah. Yeah. Small system. Yeah. True.
I think that's probably a
Just follow up question sort of in terms of
what you were saying around, um, uh, vulnerabilities
that we might have, uh, have as well.
Um, uh, what, what is, what kind of analysis
or any assessments you've done in terms of who you procure
with, because you have these, uh, multinational corporations
who aren't loyal to any country, might be, uh,
and are about, uh, might be involved in kind of, um,
giving services to people that we might not like.
Uh, do you have any analysis, uh, that you've done on
that kind of thing about who you, do
You wanna get to the procurement rules?
Well, is this in the specific space
area or generally just space
General, and then I've gonna kind of have specific follow
Up there. Well, well,
generally in terms
of New Zealand's procurement rules, you have
to be country agnostics.
So the first question at, in, in a sense is not where
a particular piece of capability might be coming
from a related point.
However, there is a second, at least a second step, which is
a legal assessment around human right
meeting obligations under human
international human rights law.
So although we are not, we are country agnostic, there is a,
there is a step to be taken if required to make sure
that the supplier or the supplying country is meeting their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
What, what about, what about starlink?
So for example, the guy
that owns it partners split is quite fled.
I mean, how much of our systems are reliant on, on starlink,
um, get on the wrong side of that could switch the,
switch the power off?
Um, I mean that's, so have you, how do you manage that?
Do you, are we, are we using Starlin at all?
Um, starlink is used for our reed, uh, where we need to,
for our Reed Blue, we call 'em Blue Bottle,
but these are the, the vessels that are out there patrolling
and monitoring illegal fishing
and other transnational crime movements.
Um, we where we can, we always try
and use our own, um, military
comm satellite communication links that are fitted
to our ships aircraft
and fielded by our army where we can
for, for security reasons.
But I, I would not rule out having
to rely on starlink if we're conducting a humanitarian
and disaster relief operation in the Pacific,
that whose infrastructure has been devastated
and their comms networks are down,
will we use what we have to Yeah.
Yeah. And if that's styling bit, so
I was just sort of wondering about the strategies
of somebody that's potentially volatile in terms
of the person that owns it.
Well, I think it's not, it's not go down
that track specifically,
but if I can take a step back where we contract
with a supplier, whether it's the NZDF contracting
with a supplier for a particular service,
or the MOD contracting supplier,
we have very strict contracts around delivery
and enforceability and milestone payments and,
and ensuring that we get what we are paying for.
So the best protection for Fickleness,
whether it's an individual
or a company, is a strong league, is a strong legal, um,
basis that you can actually take to court
and win from, which we have a strong track record
of, of doing.
Can I, at risk of answering a question
that has not been asked,
but I know that space is a matter of, at least in some parts
of the New Zealand public, it's a matter of public concern.
You know, the militarization of space. Mm-hmm.
We share that concern. We're not blind to it.
We have no wish. I mean, we, you know, new Zealanders party
to the Outer Space Treaty.
We've got our own domestic legislation including the nuclear
legislation, which is important,
but in one sense that that stable door is already open and,
and, and forces are bolting not least,
'cause quite a lot of what's up there is dual use
and it can be used for military,
but it's also what you use when you use Google Maps.
And so one of the reasons that New Zealand has joined
these three pieces of architecture
and set up squadrant, some of those pieces
of international architecture, by the way we joined in 2015,
they're not, they're not new, is to really reinforce
to try and work with others.
And not just five eyes, but France, Germany,
and Norway to reinforce good behavior in space
and to call out bad behavior.
So it's an, it's an area
where there should be public debate in my view,
because none of us around this table
or more broadly want to see the militarization space.
But it also seems to me that we have to tackle this rule
with a degree of realism that where we would like
to be is not where we now are globally.
And I don't think we'll ever get back to that.
So it's now a matter of trying to make sure
that the future is rather more secure for us
than where we currently are.
Alright. Uh, still on this section?
Uh, yes. Yep. Okay. Penny.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, this one we've sort
of brushed a little bit on it and it's the defense state.
Um, this is obviously significant investment,
not only already announced, but also signaled.
So my question has two prongs.
The first one is, how in prioritizing the estate investment,
are we managing the risks given
the unfunded maintenance liabilities for such investments?
And the second prong to that question is about, um,
so drinking from a fire hose, uh, we have challenges
for workforce in the construction and other areas.
Um, what consideration is NZDF given to that?
Uh, considering that those challenges are also out in, uh,
off bases and in general housing
and construction development in the country.
Okay. Would never be happy for me to bring, uh, head
of defense state infrastructure
Drinking from firehouse.
I did well in English. It's called did you English
And welcome, uh, head of Defense, state
and Infrastructure, uh, Mr.
Mark Brenton. Um, so I just,
before I give Mark a chance
to go into more detail on your answer, um, I
completely agree.
There are a number of risks we are facing
with such an extensive, uh,
defensive state and infrastructure.
I think the figures are something like, um, uh, 80%
of our infrastructure has less than, uh, uh,
20% of its life.
Yes. 70% less than 20 years. 20 years.
20 years, yeah.
Um, you know, a significant number of buildings, uh,
bridges, wolves, um, uh, plant.
Um, so it is a, is a big risk for us.
Um, we have a, a small amount set aside
for the ongoing maintenance of that.
Uh, we have various capability projects to replace some
of those facilities that have gone past their useful life.
Um, there is a relatively small amount
of new construction going on,
and I have to say, it's amazing when I go to any one
of our camps or bases and look at a new building
and look at the people working in there,
and the, the level of professionalism that you feel,
the moment you walk in the door and the,
and the optimism that they feel, uh, is remarkable.
Um, we just need more of it, but it is a risk.
There's not enough to go around
and we manage what little funding we get for that.
Um, very sparingly and with a massive prioritization basis.
I have to say, I, you know, I think Mark
and his team in defense state infrastructure do a,
do an amazing job of managing those risks.
But I'll leave Mark talk about it.
Sure. Uh, ko de the, um, we do have a, uh,
quite a robust prioritization system.
Um, and the member's aware of how we try to juggle many,
many priorities, um, um, both in terms of, um,
security, health and safety, wellbeing, um, operational.
Um, and so, and those priorities don't stay the same.
They, but they're shifting Security at the moment is one
that is, um, prioritized just as, um, maintaining the bases,
um, operational, um, capabilities.
But as the CD said, we do have great teams
who are keeping the nine camps and bases
and the two training grounds.
Operational. They've remained operational, um,
throughout some very difficult times,
but they're getting very close to their used by date.
Um, so both in terms of maintenance of the existing asset
and replacement of the assets, they are going through this,
um, what I would say quite a rigorous, um, um,
bidding session, if you like,
to see who's going to, uh, get through.
And, um, they're waited, um, and then decided upon, um,
before they are, are actually funded.
The vast majority go through cabinet
or through the expenditure committee
because they generally, um, exceed a,
um, a certain threshold.
So we are really quite confident that we are trying
to do the best that we can.
We've done some analysis on the estate
that has been replaced and overlaid the aged estate
and found that we are replacing the right, um,
estate at the right time.
Just not enough of it.
And 'cause we are in such deficit, um,
which has happened over many, many decades.
So, um, we're on the right track
and, uh, there are some really good initiatives going
on around the place.
I, um, if, um, if you like,
I can just talk a little bit about housing.
I know that, uh, one of the members asked about the housing,
the housing, um, program, uh, called, um,
homes families has commenced
and, um, is, is well underway on almost all
the camps and bases.
Um, it is a key enabler to our,
to our operational capability of our people.
Very, very important. Um,
and so in terms of of numbers, we have, um,
we have 23, um, homes under construction.
Um, and we've leased 35 from, uh, um, from the Iwi, um,
ATU up in, um, in Auckland.
Um, currently under procurement we've got a 71 homes
and another 90 under, um, leasing.
So 269 homes, nearly 20% of our, um,
housing stock is being renewed.
Um, sort of a long way to go,
but a great start to where we were a few years ago.
Um, and we are, uh, preparing now for, um, the next tranche,
um, of, of, of housing.
So that's really important.
The other part of housing our people is on
base with our barracks.
Um, and we are currently, um,
preparing a new submission to, um, to look at, um, um,
replacing our barracks at scale and with speed, um,
and trying to look at the most, um, economical way
of replacing, um, our barracks, which have really, um,
deteriorated very quickly.
And we've had some real challenges, particularly at, um,
pacu as you'd be aware, we've had
to replace all the barracks there over
a very short period of time.
And, um, we're just aware that that is a, uh, scenario
that could happen on any of our camps and base.
Sorry. And the other, if you don't mind the other part
about that, are you coming up against any
of those construction workforce challenges that
In, in, in some, in some parts,
but generally there is a highly competitive market out there
that is seeking NZDF, um,
um, construction projects.
We know of course that all our, um, construction, um,
projects go to go to New Zealand companies
and is, um, generally in the regions, um, is, is um,
supporting the regional, um, construction market
and the maintenance market as well.
So, um, but no, generally we've uh, had some really,
really good responses
and we're in the market at the moment for some barracks, um,
uh, at public Europe.
Just coming to the conclusion of
that very, very high interest.
So can you give us an indication of what percentage
of the new housing stock is offsite manufacturing produced?
Um, so we left it to the market to determine,
we gave a very broad specification of what we wanted.
Three, three bedroom house, four bedroom, um, home, a few,
um, specific requirements around storage.
Many of our, um, our, uh, our soldiers, sailors
and aviators have more kit that they need to, um,
store at home and then left it to the market to, um,
and we then, uh, looked at a competitive bids across those.
So offsite manufacturing was absolutely, um, there,
but um, to date it's been onsite manufacturing has been the
most competitive bids.
Mm-hmm. Um, having said that, the barracks at ura,
we did have offsite manufacturing
and they were brought in, um, to pacu.
So a bit of a mix at the moment. Yeah. Okay.
Tiana, I was wondering if you had any timeframes in terms
of when, you know, different, um, spots will be completed.
Um, so for pacu, um, we hope to have all
of the barracks replaced by the end of next year.
Um, so the soldiers are currently living in, in, um,
uh, temporary accommodation.
So we need to replace that, um, as fast as possible.
Um, and the rest will really be subject
to business case approval and funding as far as barracks go.
Um, the housing, um, like I said,
we've got 269 in either procurement
or in the market at the moment or under construction.
And then we'll be, uh, waiting for the next, um,
and see how the next, uh,
business case approval process will work.
And can I just say I ran into,
in the last two weeks I've run into about three businesses
in company and that have had some of those contracts,
whether it was selling taxi waves and runways
and fitting the buildings that support
for local businesses really is, um, valued and appreciated.
So yeah, I really grateful.
Alright. Okay.
We'll move on to item five of defense specific questions
and then on to the defense capability plan after that.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Um, uh, we've spoken
across the number of these matters, DCP amongst other things
and, uh, that, um, pipeline that's been expressed
through the DCPI know, and we know
because of the reports that have been done about strong
procurement process.
Um, is that procurement process robust enough
for what's being, uh, for MOD capability
and capacity, uh, to deliver upon?
That's a question for start.
Well, I think first place I would start in
is that we bought big things before,
and you think about the P eights
and the C one 30 js,
so we have a pretty strong track record.
Secondly, quite a lot of what is being, um,
purchased under the DCP in the first four years, the,
the kind of major projects have been announced that is
to say the 7, 5 7 replacement and the maritime helicopters.
And I would say they fall very squarely within the,
the normal tracks of what we do in terms of advice
to government and also the actual act of procurement.
And that will be true for much of what happens over the rest
of the 15 years.
And it's underpinned by the capability management system
of which you in particular are familiar with
and which is robust.
And we've, we've looked to strengthen that in some ways,
and I'm happy to to talk about that if you're interested.
Where I think the pressure points are going to come,
are going to be in essentially in three areas.
I think the first is, is new technology,
partly just by definition it's new.
So we, you know, we are used to buying a ship.
We are not necessarily used to buying a, a satellite or a,
or an un crewed, um, autonomous vessel.
So it's not that we can't do it,
but it's, we, we, we will have to learn some new skills
and we'll have to build, bring into integrated project teams
and different people.
Another related point is digital and cyber.
In fact, we've, we've now stood up a new domain
inside MOD dealing essentially with digital
and in the digital world
because it's, it's, it's relatively new
and it's relatively fast moving.
It's the fast moving this that I think is troubling
because we'll be challenging
because if you take an un crewed vehicle
or vessel even a year ago, we, we wouldn't have seen
what we are seeing today if you take drones in, in Ukraine.
So the trick is to try
and keep up the frontier of those developments
and not further behind
and that, so that requires a lot of agility.
Similarly, in the digital world, what we think is,
is cutting edge today, digitally may not be cutting edge
by the time we bring that capability into service.
So we have to try and create within the existing robustness
of a, of a robust system and ability to keep up or,
or near to the front end.
So that's one area I think I would say
to the member we were going to have
to pay particular attention.
I think the second is simply maritime fleet renewal.
We are basically going to be replacing,
the government will be replacing the entire Navy buffer
or by the middle of, in about 10 years,
the middle of the next decade.
And although we are familiar with Repla, you know,
buying ships, and we are familiar with training
and we are familiar with crewing
and infrastructure, the simply the scale of it,
the pace of it, and the fact that the CDF
and the chief of Navy are looking also to, to transform or,
or, or modernize the Navy, not just in terms of its hardware
but also in terms of its doctrine
and the way it goes about its business.
It's gonna make MFRA very complicated piece of of work.
So I'm, I'm not gilding the lily here, there are,
there are three areas where I think we are going to have
to be very agile.
You know, digital UNC crewed and new technologies
and MFR, some of that in particular
around maritime fleet renewal will require funding
to bring people into project teams are at a pace
and to a scale we haven't had to do before.
But I think I end where I started,
which is underpinning this,
we actually do have something called the capability
management system, which is proven it is delivered,
it's well governed.
Um, and and sitting within it are some really skilled
and experienced people both wearing ties
and uniforms who know what they're doing.
Um, so that's a long answer to what was a short question?
It was cathartic, supplementary.
Yeah. I, my supplementary was on the new technology thing.
You read my mind. Um, well done.
Uh, but I was wondering, uh, in terms of that process,
and maybe it is in this capability in I end
because you get, you're gonna get to a particular point, um,
in four years, uh, four, four years.
Do you have to make corn buy something?
Um, uh, so, so how, how do you, how do you,
how do you balance it up?
Um, what have, what have you got in place so
that when you make that purchase, um,
you're buying something at X amount of dollars,
you don't want sharp a week ladder,
you can buy it down at the local JB high five
for 50 bucks. So, um,
Well certainly That's what, what is it,
what is the detail in terms of and your timeframe to,
Well, the timeframes of those really set out
in the DCP itself?
Yeah, and and I, I, I wouldn't want to go
and be, be more specific than that at the moment.
Partly because we haven't given advice on a lot
of this Yeah.
To government. But also, secondly, I don't,
these are gonna be matters of commercial negotiation
and I'd rather keep some information
to myself on that at the moment.
But to answer your question,
'cause it's, it's a serious one.
Part of it is for us
to actually have a different risk appetite
and be prepared to fast fail
and by the way, potentially in new technologies
to be prepared to spend money and lose it.
And that's not something I, in the course of my career,
I would've said to this committee, but that, but
because the technology is moving so quickly, but also
because some of these unit costs are quite low.
So it's exactly your point.
You know, you can buy a drone at Harvey Norman, wherever
for, for 5,000, or you can buy it for 50,000.
Well, we might choose to buy it for 5,000
and then we might find it's actually not fit for purpose
for a military purpose, but it was worth spending the 5,000
up front even if we then decided that, that we should have,
we could have spent it differently.
So I think there's going to be something different
around our risk tolerance,
something different about the speed
with which we are prepared to purchase things.
This is one of the things that the chief
of the Defense Force and I are saying inside our own system.
It's a new approach called minimum viable capability,
which is basically we don't need, we are prepared
to sacrifice bells and whistles for speed.
If we can get something that will do most of the job well
and quickly, then we are prepared to go down
that route rather than something that will do all
of the job, but will take an extra two
or three years to procure
because we both have some sense of urgency.
I mean, I don't think we sleep walking our way into global
conflict, but I do think we have to be prepared
for the possibility that by act
or miscalculation, the world is
looking a more dangerous place.
And we have, we are to government,
but also to citizens to be, to be prepared.
So part of it is to actually say now, in the old days,
we basically had three pillars.
We held tight on budget, we held tight on scope,
and we were prepared to be a bit looser on schedule in order
to get budget and scope delivered.
But what we are now saying is we will hold tight on budget
taxpayers money, but we'll actually be prepared
to trade off some scope in order to get faster delivery.
So the system is actually around risk
and minimum viable capability and risk tolerance.
And those three pillars is, is adjusting itself to this,
to this new environment.
The last point I'd make
is the DCP includes a tech accelerator,
accelerator technology accelerator, which the NZD will run.
And I think the private sector will probably operate on
behalf of, of the defense establishment to basically try
and encourage New Zealand firms who've got smart ideas
to come to the table with those smart ideas
to see if we can't actually buy things at home.
It has the advantage of reinforcing our domestic resilience,
but it also has the advantage of a cheaper form
of fast fail if you like,
because we are prepared to
put money in New Zealand companies
and say, fill your boots, give it a go, um, not much money
and we might get something good out of it.
Can I just have a follow up question around, um, risk
around supply chain?
Uh, I mean I think with what you were saying about
New Zealand, because they'll be subject
to New Zealand domestic law, so that's fine,
but if you're having to go overseas, um,
and you've, you've, you've got a,
a particular procurement which looks good
and it's a particular supply chain.
Have you, have you done any thought about around risks
if all of a sudden five years later you don't like the way
that this, this lies is doing stuff, um,
because they might be helping the other
side or, or whatever.
Um, have you done any risk around, uh, a risk as, uh,
assessments or what?
We haven't done that formally, but I would say this,
You've done it informally.
Well, we've done it practically. We've done it concretely.
If you look at who our suppliers are,
they're actually Western Europe and the United States by
and large, um, allies, partners
and friends, they're not, they're not people
that I can see in five
or 50 years being company that we would not wish to be.
Mm-hmm. That's the first thing.
The essential portfolio of suppliers big
and small are trusted partners with who in many cases
with whom we've worked over many years.
I accept that in the tech space, which is a new frontier,
there are new suppliers coming on stream.
But a key question that we would be asking
and that we ask ourselves of any new supplier
that does not have a track record
or that is not backed formally
or informally by a government is are they reputable?
Are they people we want to do business with?
Do we think we will get the product we want?
What happens if they walk away your point
in five or 10 years?
So that's, that's in a sense for new entrants
and portfolio's. A kind
Of two tier kind of thing In, in a sense.
Secondly, um, we do, you know, we undertake competitive
contracting, tendering, we negotiate type contracts,
we have milestone payments, so there's a lot of
demand out there for military equipment.
And the danger is not quite the one that you mentioned,
but we might fall off.
We might be pushed to the back of a queue
at a time when we don't want to be at the back of a queue.
And so we are working quite hard to make sure that we are
being clear about our requirements
and trying to get in, get in early.
The last point I'd make is there's something there,
there are instruments if you like, uh, pieces
of little pieces of architecture that are helpful.
So if you take, there's something called Paper, which is,
um, a partnership for Indo-Pacific Industrial Resilience.
And there's been some commentary here
and overseas about, it's, it's, it's, it's kind of a, a, um,
it might be nefarious actually the current work
that Piper is doing is to figure out how those
of us in the region who have the eights
can maintain our radars by working together, um, and,
and make that as efficient and timely as possible.
So I make that point because
although our allies, partners and friends might
or might in one sense be competitors for the same amount
of equipment, we've also shown an ability to work together
to ensure that in a competitive market we are actually
helping each other out to keep things going.
I'm interested in picking up on the procure of invoice
'cause totally accept that.
Uh, we need to be looking now more at minimum
viable capability.
We've moved away from an environment where
actually managing risk, where the risk is
around not quite getting what you want.
So being prepared to push out the timeframe to achieve that.
Uh, whereas now the risk is about not having capability,
not being responsive enough.
And so how do you,
or what are you doing within the ministry
to change the culture to achieve that?
Because that's been a pretty established method of operating
for quite some time under a well known established system.
And yet we need to really flip it on here.
So, so what are you doing to,
I'm not being flippant when I say this.
Um, in a way, the risk is almost the opposite.
We've got a whole lot of smart people who would say,
who would look at the likes of us
and say, God's sake, we've been telling you for the last 10
or 15 years that you're getting in our way.
We can be more agile and quicker.
And the danger now is that we've kind
of opened the floodgates and they want to be more agile and
and faster than actually our risk tolerance is,
is prepared to accept.
That's not a flippant answer, that's actually true.
We've got a whole lot of smart people who are really,
they're trying to think creatively
and in a savvy way to get what we need,
minimum viable in the quickest possible way.
And if you actually think about from going from go to woe
on maritime helicopters
and go to woe on 7, 5, 7 replacement,
it was probably a year faster, at minimum
a year faster at least, if not 18 months faster than
what we would've done five years ago.
So we've actually got the skilled people
with the right approach and the knowledge to make this work.
Our job is to both encourage that on the one hand
and avoid recklessness on the other.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Okay.
And so from that perspective,
what do you envisage getting down to in terms
of decision making timeframes?
'cause even some of those scenarios
around the UNC crewed systems, for example, that rapid rate
of technological development, there needs
to be prompt decisions to be able
to deliver an immediate outcome.
There. There are at least two answers to that.
The first is within the better business case process,
which is robust.
If you take, um, on, on,
on like, um, purchases
or like advice, you know, in terms of complexity,
there's probably a 12 month difference between starting
and final decision between those who do it really well
and those who do it poorly.
I don't mean the quality of the advice,
I just mean the pace at which they move through the steps.
So we already think that within the existing rigor
of government processes, better business case,
we can probably squeeze up to it up to 12 months
without losing rigor just by being really focused on that.
That's one answer. Uh, the second is in the miners program,
which CDF runs, not me,
but it's, it's pieces of equipment that fall
below a kind of threshold.
I think there's a real sense of trying to be urgent in
that space and not too many put too many
as many barriers in the way.
And I think the third point is exactly in that digital
and new technology space, setting up new systems,
new teams really who are focusing,
who are not doing this part-time,
but doing it as a day job who can come to us
with real advice about
how we can squeeze time out of the process.
Penny, uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, I, I cast my mind back to a year ago during the last
opportunity to scrutinize annual reviews, we
covered at length a matter of challenge around savings
that have been asked for from both N-C-D-F-R-M-O-D.
Um, and that was a really good robust discussion.
But I note you've got an underspend from this last
On capital.
Yes, Correct. 24%. 24%.
That's because the foreign military sales, um, part
of the United States, um, when they ask us for money,
they do it according to their schedule, not ours.
And so it's the P eights essentially,
so the money's there sitting ready to be paid
to the Americans, but the way they run their
schedule is that it hasn't fallen.
It's still on your books? It's still on my books, yeah.
It's, it's, it's not within our gift to pay it.
We have to pay it,
but we have to pay it when we get an invoice.
So when that goes, your books will be alright.
So when that goes, we,
we are roughly running it about a hundred percent of,
of capital spend, all nine four.
I think
That's correct. Yeah.
And, and did I note too though,
there there was a minor
or very small underspending in the
departmental, did I read that correctly?
I think just under a million,
Yes. 800,000.
Uh, that's partly
because we keep doing in principle expense
transfers year on year and,
and we're just kind of rolling over
the same amount of money.
And that's because when we stand up, for example,
a project like Marathon Fleet renewal
before it's capitalized, before government agree
or cabinet agree that this should be a pro project
or a program which can come out of the capital budget
if we need staff comes out of your,
it comes out of our departmental.
So we try and run a buffer to c to cover
that delta before a project.
Big project in particular is capitalized
To stop on that.
Do you have foreign exchange cover for that delayed payment?
Well, we have probably the best foreign exchange hedging
expert in government pka, um,
who, who could earn a lot of money in the private sector.
I expect with his skillset, um,
Ing as CFO for the ministry.
Uh, we fully hedge all foreign currency exposure.
Uh, it just under the accounting rules, we have
to recognize it at spot.
So what you see, the numbers does fluctuate,
but that's an accounting treatment rather than, um, uh,
rather than foreign currency fluctuation.
So we hitch all our exposure as soon as it's done.
So for the P agency, one lady that was done, uh,
when we got the letter of offer from the United States
government, uh, way back at the start of, uh, the project.
So that's what on your book says at the time of
the offers, that's
that that'll sit on your books as that now?
Uh, that's correct in terms of the cash cost
to government, but in terms of accounting, what we need
to recognize is when we pay the bill, the spot rate.
So that's an accounting treatment.
So what you see some of the fluctuations at the moment,
the underspend is caused
by two technical accounting elements.
One is recognizing at the spot.
Uh, and the second one is, uh, as secretary mentioned,
the foreign military sales regime where, um,
we pay up front, but the, the,
the dis government timeframes disbursement. Um,
Thank you.
Thank you. Alright, we'll move on
to the defense capability plan.
Uh oh.
Um, Sydney, if at the start you just sort
of hinted at a brief anecdote with the J model going down
to Hakey in the middle of winter,
I wonder in, what did
I say? Yeah,
it's not far for it to go intact.
You need an Atlas challenge.
Yeah, that's why I find, um, I wonder, could you just, uh,
elaborate just to give people a sense of what this, um,
there might be, um, uh, many
watching or, or listening that
won't, won't know the details.
Could you just sort of step us through that, that story or,
or, or another example of what sort
of you've seen in terms of the project?
I do wanna ask about introduction
to service coming outta the capability plan,
but I thought it might be a, a
helpful anecdote to start with
Around reference to the C one 30 J itself or,
or conducting a midwinter.
Well, well, yes, if there's a, I I was just thinking of,
you mentioned that one in the introduction
as the the midwinter rescue.
Mm-hmm. But in terms of these new capabilities that,
that are coming out of this plan and, and,
and what the tangible impact is for people, what that means,
say compared to an old platform. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Okay.
Well, um, I have to say that, uh,
using the C one 30 J that early in its,
uh, introduction into service for that high level
of risk operation was, was no easy, uh, decision.
Um, however, um, the chief of Air Force
and the Air component commander, you know,
that it is their job
to review the risks associated with that.
And having had a good look at it, um, managed it.
So the, we, we have done
I think five previous midwinter or,
or win Antarctic rescue missions outside the normal season.
We fly down there before, um,
they all carry a significant amount of risk
because of the fact primarily
that the Hercules cannot fly down to Antarctica
and back without refueling.
So at some point on the flight, on the way down,
there's a point of no return, um, where you are exposed
for about an hour and a half
before landing in Antarctica where you can't turn back.
That's the problem. Uh, with the Hercules.
Um, that's where the new Airbus
A 3 21 XLR will, uh, alleviate those pressures.
So it will, you know, in the future, if we have to do a,
a must do flight, like a, a rescue
of someone who's critically ill,
I'm sure the A 3 21 XLR will be the
go-to aircraft to accomplish that.
The C one 30 J offered significant advantages over the
old aircraft
because it does have, uh, extended range
that is more reliable
and results in less turnbacks due to mechanical uh, issues.
Um, and it does have, um, you know, modern
NVG compatible capabilities, which the crew used to affect
that, that mission down there.
Um, so there are advantages to it,
but it, it, I again emphasize it,
it was a significant, uh, decision by the Air Force
to undertake that mission.
But there were, there were a few other options
that person needed to come out urgently.
And so, um, so they conducted
that mission a lot earlier than
what we normally would've at the, at that point in the,
um, introduction.
And I think that's, that, that maybe the interesting thing
is in terms of introduction, introducing new platforms,
whether they're maritime with our land,
with ear into service, um, that's
what we've just been talking about with the ministry in
terms of that prioritizing timeliness, you know, and,
and some of the old projects like,
I'm not even sure all the labs ever got out of the hangar,
but, um, certainly some other projects took years to reach
that final operating capability.
How are you, uh, like what are you doing different
with something like the, the J model
or whatever the next project is to come online
or the Bush master compared to older platforms?
And, and, and how are you seeing that impact in terms
of outputs?
Firstly, we, with many
of our capabilities there are one off.
So we don't have other squadrons of hercs
that can carry the gap while we're introducing, um,
you know, another fleet of c thirties and service.
So, so the introduction to service,
the transition from old HERC to new HERC was planned
to basically hit the ground running.
I mean, we had the new Hercules on tasks within two weeks
of arriving back in New Zealand.
That's too unheard of.
Um, so it's gonna be the same with all
of the new capabilities in our, that are coming up in our,
our transition where we can, we'll try
and design the program so that there is overlap
and you can fade out the old one as you are
introducing the, the new one.
In some cases that might not be possible,
but we will, we'll, we'll go to all extents possible
to make sure there's no capability gap.
Um, okay.
If I can swap this a moment, then just ask about, um,
in terms of the maritime domain, uh, multi role vessel,
which is a defense capability plan and,
and anything in that sort of electoral space,
when I think about ROA
or, you know, we see a lot of, um,
an increase over the last five
or 10 years of deployments into the Pacific
and the haar space, but also just using it.
You spoke about Talisman Saber earlier.
I think you've used Canterbury
and other ships to get assets like the helicopters deployed
there, even though they're self deployed.
Um, how is that project looking up?
I know it's a sort of a 10, 15 year timeline,
but what is the, what is the sort of sequence looking like
for replacements or upgrades to, uh, Canterbury
and if it comes into that water bucket?
Um, y yeah, I, I would start by saying that, um,
uh, all of our vessels are highly, uh,
desirable, highly utilized.
If you look at the, the tanker Al Toyota, all
of our partners want that ship.
Um, it, you look at the amount of time it's spent
as at sea since we've acquired it.
Um, we can't get enough of it being at sea occasionally.
We'll, and increasingly we'll have to take it out of service
to have it maintained and overhauled.
Um, and that's, that's gonna hurt.
That's why we are building into our plan plans to acquire a,
a second replenishment, replenishment or, or tanker.
Um, if you look at Canterbury for some of those other roles,
we are talking about, uh, humanitarian disaster relief, um,
responses into the Pacific.
Um, Canterbury is one of our most useful assets,
but she has periods where she is out of maintenance
and not available.
We try and manage those so that they don't occur
during the bad weather season when risk
of cyclones, uh, is the highest.
But we have, we have big outage periods throughout the year,
so that's why we will be, um, uh, looking
to acquire another, another platform there.
These are all the, the actual makeup
of the fleet within the maritime fleet, uh,
renewal program itself is yet to be determined.
We're working through that as fast as we can
to put options to government.
Um, and the actual makeup of the fleet, um, has yet
to be, uh, determined.
Um, but it's not just a case of of having combat vessels.
We need all of those other ones as well.
Has lro got full capability release?
Is that fully in service?
Yeah, uh, LTRI has has done an amazing service
for not just the Pacific,
but for parts of Southeast Asia as well.
You look at, she's on her way back from
what we call Operation Theo,
but that's the monitoring of, um, the sanctions
against, well, the sanctions breaches against North Korea's,
uh, nuclear program.
So L LT is on her second
or third deployment, she's just completed now.
P eight's up there supporting that as well.
The two of them were working together
and on the same mission just a couple of weeks ago,
which was fantastic to see.
But LT ROAS also serviced other nations that are on
that same mission and, um,
high, high utility risk as the secretary was saying,
um, minimum viable capability in that ship.
But we got the, we got the makeup
of the capabilities right when
we designed the build that ship.
Thank you. Uh, now we're joined online by Ms. McClure,
who has been obviously
so diligently asking questions on other committees
that she's lost her voice and has asked me to, uh,
ask a question on her behalf.
So she is, yes, but, uh, she's lost, her voice lost.
So anyway, she's interested to understand more
around the timeframes for delivery
of UNC crewed systems, drones in particular.
So, um, what is the current delivery timeframe
or the decision making process
around deciding on buying a drone system, being able
to affect that, uh,
and is that impacted by a dollar threshold, for example?
Yeah, so, uh, firstly we are, we have,
we have ungrouped systems at the moment.
Our Army has, um, how many diff different varieties.
I think we've got two or three different types.
And over the last sort of 10 years, we've had three
or four more different types in there.
As the secretary said, there's a high turnover in terms
of, um, drones.
So, so sorry, roughly, just for context,
how many drones would we have in our
military currently in our, come back to you on that,
but rough number in, in the Navy? We've got two.
Two, Yeah, sure.
So the Navy's been operating at UNC crewed
systems for over a decade.
So we have our Remus underwater system, um,
which we've got, uh, six systems.
Um, we've got two un crewed surface vessels, and both Army
and Navy have aerial systems, albeit tactical, um,
that's just been brought Army have just brought their
systems under network enabled army program. Okay.
So we're talking single digit numbers,
maybe low teens. Yeah.
You, you're talking in the vicinity of dozens
of UNC recruited systems currently across the,
primarily the two surface Navy and Army. Okay.
The, the persistent surface surveillance of the DCP, is
that more of what you've already got in terms of surface,
or is that bigger stuff that can go long range.
Again, it's get getting ahead of the, the thinking.
So, um, from an aerial perspective,
just looking at the longer range, um, UNC crewed systems,
maritime fleet renewal is looking at going
aerial surface subsurface in the hundreds is kind
of a concept, but, um,
that will be done in different tranches
and subject to government approval.
And the future t tranches of the maritime, um,
naval helicopter, uh,
have un crewed systems programmed in there as well
between three
and five, depending on how the, you know,
what's available at the time, we proceed with that tranche
and those will be there to supplement the, the helicopters
that we're running for the back of the ships.
The indicative 50 to a hundred million in the DCP for
surface autonomous surface vessels.
That's sort of a placeholder in terms
of this is the capability we know we need,
we just dunno the shape of it yet that, or, or,
or you fill in the blanks for me,
like I'm genuinely interested.
Yeah, what we might do is we might get our capability
expert to, to the, to the table.
We've got two of 'em here.
Um, uh, Brigadier Western is the assistant chief
capability for the Defense Force,
and he has, um, has far more granular detail on the
sequencing and timing questions you asked about. Thank
You. Yeah,
Koto.
So, um, in terms of tactical, uh, accrued systems
and land, they are, uh, being delivered into the units.
Um, and we're just going to, um,
Get to final Operational release in terms of numbers,
I can't give you exact numbers,
but very small like nano that fly into the next room.
They're populated across our reconnaissance platoons
and, uh, and tech infantry.
Um, and then we have a larger sys, uh,
larger quad coter type system, which again,
the reconnaissance platoons use,
and then a larger system still that's got about a two
to four hour endurance.
And I, I would say we'd have, you know, about eight
of those, but we can confirm that.
So those are coming into service.
Um, uh, chief of Navy's talked about, uh,
what's going on in the maritime space.
Um, and then above that we have the persistent surveillance,
uh, project, which is just starting to stand up,
and that's looking at providing persistent maritime domain
awareness, looking to deliver in the late 2020s.
And we're just starting to form up, uh, a view
of what those options are.
Um, and there is a placeholder on the DCP alongside this.
We have a, um, we're doing a range of experiments
through the defense science and technology agency,
and we're just starting to initiate some experience from,
uh, capability branch whereby we are looking to partner
with, um, industry to look at what we can bring on quicker,
uh, how we can integrate it into, um,
maybe more cheap mass produced systems
and integrate 'em into our slightly more
exquisite military commander control.
And those, um, experiments we're just starting
to generate at the moment.
Thank you. I could add, sorry, if I could just add to that
this, these new technologies, drones with good shorthand,
they're also the sort of thing where it's WW we want
to go out to industry in terms of the DCP
and say, here's what we want.
We want this thing called persistent surveillance.
Can you tell us how you think it can best be done?
Rather than us going to them
and saying, we want to buy six drones from you.
Mm. So we want, we, we don't want
to pretend we know everything here.
We really do want to partner with industry,
particularly industry in the innovation space
to say, here's our problem.
What are you telling? What do you think
our solution looks like?
Different way of a different branch supplementary Tiana to
Yeah, just sort of on, on, on the back of the stuff
that Laura was asked by a team, um, just around, um, uh,
dollar costs and, and we have talked about drones, unmanned,
um, unmanned, um, devices, uh,
vessels and so on and so forth.
But what about like, uh, missiles, right?
So sort of the question around the javelin missiles, uh,
drones, um, things, other things that are being purchased.
So things you can have a lot, have a, you know, have a lot,
a lifetime of use that you can use
with missiles, you fire 'em off.
And that's a, so I was wondering, uh, around the,
the purchasing choices there, are you both buying them?
What is it, you know,
what are they they cost per, per missile?
Um, and what plans, uh, do you have to, um, kind
of keep, uh, resupplying them
Your details?
Sure. Um, at a thematic level, um, purchasing
those more precise, um, ammunition systems is,
is quite tricky in terms of they have a shelf life.
Um, they require careful management.
You also need to meet very strict,
uh, security requirements.
Um, so that has to be factored in.
Uh, c diffs already touched on the issue we have
with getting into the, um, queue to buy things.
So you mentioned jev
and missiles, those are being used at a huge trade in the
Ukraine, and now we, there's a shortage.
Um, so we are in a queue to replace ours.
I won't talk about what timeframe.
Um, and then I guess you've got that, uh, cost versus
risk, um, to balance, you know, how many do you buy
and manage rather than, um, you know, as a,
as an insurance policy, rather than buying just enough
to train with to ensure you have an immediate response.
Um, and then work out what your supply chain is
to get them the systems when you need.
And each ammunition system's a little bit different. Um, do,
Do you, can you give us like a kind
of route, a ballpark figure?
Like I, my six of them,
or, oh, well, sorry,
I'm not a military person, so I'm just trying to Yeah,
I mean, yeah.
Javelin, um, missile
and I, I didn't bring my book up with me.
Um, I don't have the exact number,
but you're talking, um, into the, you know,
I'd say low millions,
but given that that destroys a, um,
very sophisticated armored vehicle, um,
that is worth significantly more.
There is a challenge at the moment where, um, you know, as,
uh, technologies a mass produced that we, um,
start from very expensive mini, we risk running,
firing very expensive munitions at very cheap things.
And we have to balance that out in our future thinking of
how we do this, I think the, the, the average costs online
for Javelin are available,
but they're around 200,000 for, oh, sorry,
for the actual missile you've hired,
but the, the, the, the launcher and
Training to use and you wouldn't use, would
You? We have simulators.
Simulators, Yeah.
And, and, you know, sometimes in our exercises we, um,
we fire the real thing just so people know what it,
what it feels like to be around a, a weapon that's firing.
I will say as well that a lot of our partners would
throw out their old stock
of missiles without even using them once they are
superseded or become obsolete.
Um, like most of our things we look at, uh, what we can do
to upgrade it and, and be more cost effective.
Do, do you know what the shelf offer of those are?
Uh, of jevons? I don't know, but we can get back to you.
But we, we are just in the process of actually upgrading
our javelins, uh, at the moment. That's
The, the launch a Control system
And the, and the actual head of the, the missile itself.
It's a classic key response, isn't it?
We'll Jimmy it up and use it again.
Well, we look at what we did with our Hercules
upgraded three times, but like grand,
It's probably a reason why, you know,
that Chuck out having trouble
getting a hold of number of, sorry. I'll bring
In today. Uh,
thank you Mr. Chair. This is a primary
and slightly different, probably more aimed, uh,
at the Ministry of Defense on page 22 of the annual report.
You speak to the strategic defense policy settings as part
of the DCP that are the words, uh, on
that particular section.
Uh, you also have a, a case study on that page that speaks
to how the strategic defense policy settings were developed
for the DCP.
And you go further into naming the
partnership with Australia.
However, if we look at defense policy objective number two
on that page, it says in heart,
specifically the Ansys Alliance
With Australia.
Yes. Yeah. So that's what I want I see
to be cleared up here because it's very,
because if that was the case then it would've said it in the
case study, I would've thought.
But the language there,
The reference to the Ansys Alliance is a matter
of international law.
That is to say New Zealand has never left that alliance.
Um, it is the United States that chose within the construct
of Ansys to, to no longer, um,
apply the operative clauses of the Ansys Treaty.
But as between Australia
and New Zealand, ANSYS is still the international legal
instrument which supports that, that alliance relationship.
It's Ansys and the Canberra Act of 1944 supported also
by things like closer defense relations.
But in terms of international law at at treaty level,
the Ansys Treaty still obtains as
between Australia and New Zealand.
So we wanted for accuracy to ensure
that we were making that clear.
Yeah. Look, and, and thank you for that.
'cause I think it is important that
everyone's clear on that.
Yes. With respect to the DCP, uh, that signals obviously
that strong relationship that's already had with shared
with Australia, um, uh,
and it's got other strategic partners there.
Uh, is there any fear that that might limit, uh, any
of the procurement or challenge any of the procurement
that might give the taxpayer more bang for buck
or opportunities to explore into other spaces
where those partners might not be?
We ask ourselves in the DCP context, a,
a a specific question.
In fact, the two of us haven't asked that.
The templates that cover the advice that comes to us
as governors answer these four questions.
What is the Australian approach And is there any reason
for New Zealand to take a different approach?
So those, the two clauses need to be read together.
We are not just saying, what is Australia doing,
but we are saying, does it make sense for us to do the same?
Is there a reason for us not to?
Sometimes there will be a reason for us not to,
and it might be cost,
or it might be that they have built, bought a capability
for a particular theater
or environment that is not the same as ours.
So we are not blindly just just following Australia
as a matter of interest to the member.
We also asked of the other four questions, can we partner
with industry to deliver the capability differently?
What is the minimum viable capability needed
and what is the most cost effective and durable option?
So we put all of those four questions together to try
and help us ensure that the people giving us advice.
And then when we give advice to the minister, we're trying
to look at this in a, in a robust and integrated way.
We know one part
of this ecosystem predominates over the
other TILs Australia.
It's cost, it's durability, it's industry,
and its scope all being brought into a common space. Very
Good. Thank you.
All right. Any Further
Question On dcp?
Yeah, sorry, I was gonna say might be a good segue into
the industry. I agree.
Right. Let's move into section seven on defense
industry, our final section.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, congratulations.
I think it's very good to have a clear strategy on this, uh,
and acknowledging your regular efforts in this particular
session to explain that we are looking
for those multiple wins where we can support local,
uh, economy.
Um, is the view then, uh, so simply off the back
of the discussion that we've had with respect to Australia
and their significant investments in their capability, um,
certainly in the last budget,
but in the number of previous budgets, uh,
with our economic relationship with them, what exactly, um,
is the outcome that we might hope from
that particular strategy around defense industry
in partnership
or in, you know, in the same conversation
as our economic relationship?
Strategic economic relationship stop
First is that the Aussies might buy stuff from
us, not the other way around.
Good, good Answer. The second is
that our exporters in the defense industry can actually
get easy access into the Australian market, which
at a legal level and at a CER level they can,
but there are often practical impediments.
Um, and security clearances, for example,
come up quite a lot with an industry
that is not an insurmountable problem.
And I hasten to say the Australians are genuinely not trying
to be obstructionist, but sometimes there's,
there's just a gap between strategic policy is set
by respective governments, which are in very firm alignment
and the operationalizing of that at the level of the firm.
But, but I don't think there's anything there that can't be,
that can't be resolved.
Thirdly, it's buying
like capability where it makes sense to do so, both
to drive down unit cost of purchase, to make training
more efficient and cheaper
to make maintenance more efficient
and cheaper, um, to bulk buy, if you like, training and kit
and maintenance where we, where we can, uh,
the third is to ensure
that there's some redundancy between us.
So we don't, each of us have exactly the same meetings,
excuse me, and exactly the same basket in the event
that there was some kind of conflict.
We, we, we want to have a little bit of redundancy, not only
for our own sake, but also trans tasman,
but, but between us.
Um, and then I think
l learn from each other in terms of these things called,
for example, industry ca, um, capability plans, which is
to make sure that the primes both in Australia
and in New Zealand are factoring in domestic suppliers.
So we wanna learn from Australia's experience
and that we want to learn from Australia in terms
of the tech accelerator, where they're ahead of us
and that learn what works
and what pitfalls to, to, to dodge.
And then I think finally,
and ultimately we want to just make sure that we are talking
to each other about quite a lot of
what this session has been about innovation
and new technology so that we're both keeping up
with each other but not having
to cover the waterfront in terms of keeping up, you know,
trying to, trying to learn from them.
And then finally, just trying to make sure that doctrine
and what the NZDF
and the A DF actually do in the battle space with the kit
is compatible so that when we do work together, inter
or fight together, we are genuinely interoperable.
Mm-hmm.
Sorry, new primary. That's all you go for it.
Um, uh, scanning over the defense, um,
industry strategy, uh, there's optimum a discussion had
with our Pacific partners about some of,
I'd call them loans, if you will,
that they inherit our old kit.
Well, we, you kit, uh, was there any view in the defense,
um, industry strategy that might look towards
the Pacific also being part of our ecosystem in developing
and growing an industry there, uh, to support our neighbors?
I don't know. I, I'm turning to Huntley
who was the architect author of this and they should come up
and, and, and to my answer, um,
there's something about how new technology might be quite
helpful for the Pacific, I think.
'cause it's cheap. But even though a drone is cheap,
it's a conversation we have inside our own house.
It gets information.
That information has to be processed somewhere, has
to be sifted and assessed,
and then a decision has to be taken
and then something they find a vessel, something has
to be done to it.
So, so just having cheap technology without
associated infrastructure doesn't get our friends in the
Pacific quite far enough.
Mm. So in a sense, I think the ecosystem,
which is exactly the right word in a sense as we have it,
is the one that we have to continue.
So yes, there's something about equipment and capability
and platforms where we have,
where Australia and New Zealand in particular have a job
in providing our Pacific partners with reliable, effective,
cost, effective, easily maintained capabilities.
Fine. But actually we still have to put king ears up.
We still have to put blue bottles up. Yeah.
Uh, we still have to help with, um, domain
awareness and then intelligence and sifting of information.
And the CDF and I, in fact have just come back from p
and g and Fiji.
They're really pleased with the DCP.
They really see value in this broad based defense force,
which can do lots of things.
Well, stepping up and being rebuilt.
They really welcome that.
But their, they will be the first to say, I think
that their human capital
and their infrastructure base is very narrow and very thin.
We can't just throw them a problem with a bit
of kit and say, fill your boots.
That's, that's actually, that's
what the patrol boats have shown
that over 15 years, that's been part of the problem.
Throw them a piece of kit
and say, here you are, fill your boots.
Mm-hmm. We actually still have
to work in genuine partnership with them, which goes well
beyond just, just the platform. Um,
Um, um, um, thank you secretary.
Um, I simply really, um, endorse the, uh,
the secretary's comments.
Um, the question around, um, the types of capability
that we acquire in the utility in the, in the South Pacific
is, is generally one that's sort
of settled at the requirements level
and obviously, um, it's, it's at the forefront, um,
of our, of our thinking.
Um, we have had some very good examples recently where
we've got good New Zealand suppliers, uh,
providing capability not just to, um, defense,
but to the wider, uh, maritime secu, um, security community,
which are also being utilized through such things as the,
um, the forum's fishery agency.
Mm-hmm. So star, which, which provides a, a,
a really smart marathon intelligence capability, um, is,
is being utilized, um, in that space.
And, and, and that's fantastic, um, to, to, to see.
But again, um, you know,
I just come back to the requirements.
It's, it's really much at the forefront of our thinking.
But the ticket accelerator, who knows what
that's going to throw up?
And I, I just think this approach that we are now taking
of saying we are not going to define the solution
to the problem, just going to define the problem that's,
and let industry try and come up with some options.
That's also true for the Pacific.
There's no reason why we couldn't go to New Zealand industry
and say, here's a problem.
How do you think it should be solved?
So I think this new approach will, will, will be helpful
to our Pacific partners.
Good. Excellent. Alright.
Any further questions on that section?
No. Okay. We'll move to, um, final wrap up questions,
if there are any from the committee
across any of those topics. And they wish to
Pretty Penny.
It's like an,
That'll be vigilant, See how it's going on Thursday.
Um,
Look, and, and, and this is a rather pointed question
and at aim at, at you both given, uh, some
of the challenges across our public sector.
Um, I'm, this question is asking an insurance or,
or processes in place to make sure the appropriate use
of devices keeping phones
and laptops across the entire
NZDF from an administrative defense
that you are both satisfied that your policies
and practices in place are there to make sure
that there is no inappropriate use of those biases.
We get our ICT from New Zealand defense
for some CDFR have the primary answer.
We have monitoring uh, in place for detection of,
um, those sorts of things you're referring
to on work devices.
Very good. If I could add to that,
just getting onto Google sometimes in the defense
environment is, it's quite hard, is pretty difficult.
We, we by and large don't like, we by
and large don't like public platforms in the defense space.
So most of what's done is actually
through a closed email by and large.
So not only is it monitored,
but it's actually, it's very tightly constrained.
Thank you, sir. Thanks chair. Thanks.
Um, just some, um,
got more questions on veterans, um, if I may.
Um,
Going, okay, we've talked about a 1.4 billion increase
and also 75 to 98% now
of the claims are likely to be successful.
Is that, did I get that right?
Is that so that, yeah, so, so that's got massive
applications As Veterans Affairs are now operating,
are you gonna be able to continue to operate, um,
with the projected increase in both costs
and the number of successful claims, um, within
your current vote?
So, so per my previous answer, uh, we have sort
of two budgets if you like.
There's departmental expenditure, which is what
we spend on making decisions and on running the department.
And then there is non-departmental expenditure, which is
what relates to covering veterans costs.
So, uh, orthopedic surgery, pay, save them pension.
Um, as I said previously, the increased liability
that was required to fund, uh, those expenses
for veterans has been paid.
So there is no issue vis-a-vis, um,
veterans putting in their claims.
Uh, there is an issue by way of the department
and its size being able to administer the law
as it currently stands.
Um, we were given $1.3 million, um,
for this financial year to deal
with the implications of that.
That funding ceases in June,
and that's currently a matter of budget consideration
for thousand 26, 27 onwards,
Which we've also heard that we've now much more
of an opted opt out.
So we have vets who were leaving
who basically were lost in the system.
Now presumably those
with qualifying operational experience won't be lost, so
that presumably will, there will be a factory there
where there'll be, you know,
considerable increased costs probably over the years.
Again, is that being budgeted for?
Is that being taken into account?
Yeah, so, so as I indicated,
the scheme at the moment is only at 13% and,
and the issues by way of backlog, uh, are well traversed.
So the issue that we face is the demand
for VA services exceeds our ability to supply.
Uh, and that is only gonna get worse.
Um, now we have, um, interestingly, by way
of the last conversation, RIT system is inside NCD.
Uh, it is heavily, heavily restricted.
Um, as I think we've discussed with the committee
before, we, we have a project in a business case underway
that looks at, uh, a new system by way of, um,
uh, both veteran interacting with it.
So you have my VA on your phone.
Um, it'll, it'll sit outside of some
of the NZDF architecture,
but still be covered by security provision,
but allow us to link up with, uh,
other systems of government.
So we estimate that that'll give us potentially 30 to 40%,
uh, efficiency gain.
Because one of the issues at the moment is veterans have
to fill in their application by, by pen and paper.
Um, so, so yes, um, there will be a requirement
for resourcing to be looked at,
but there's a lot that we can do internally
to drive our own efficiency, which is where a lot of, uh,
work is being done at the,
Okay, so that 13%, well, no, can I just
Let the questions run for a bit now on forward focus,
but now we need to come back to the year and review
Things? Well, no, this
is very much in review. Okay.
Because the 13% that you've talked about,
are they 13% of those with qualifying operational experience
or 13% of those who leave the defense force
With qualifying operations?
So that's only say 13% of qualifying operation experience.
So there could be, I mean, we talk, we heard
about the actuarial study of that, which is a little,
it, it's, it is an accurate little exact taking known facts.
Could you anticipate
that now there will be a considerably increased number. No,
I'm sorry Mr. O'Connor,
we're not speculating on the future.
This is an annual review looking at the performance
of the 24 25 here.
Uh, well, yes,
but I think it's, it's
highly relevant given what's happened.
I what I'm saying it's not, we'll
Ask a question about the year in
review or move on to the next,
Well, look, there's a lot
of veterans out there very interested in
these, these answers actually. Alright, uh,
Next question from Tim Costley.
Thanks.
Um, CDF, just as we're coming into Christmas
and I'm with a, um, bit of attention
around defense force last Christmas,
can you just give people watching us a sense of, um, there,
there's some really obvious things like maybe, I don't know,
search and rescue, um, disaster relief personnel,
but how, how many of your personnel would be rostered on
or on standby or deployed overseas at, at a time like this?
And, and so what's the message for them?
Because I think everyone around the committee table will
want to just acknowledge that, that, well, a lot
of people get a break at Christmas.
A lot of your people don't. Um,
and can you just give us a sense of
what Christmas looks like for the fence?
Well, we, we try and give people a, a break
and we nominate a, a nominal slowdown period.
Um, but we are a 24 7, 365 response,
um, fence force.
Um, and if you look at the last 30
or 40 years, things have a negligence,
whether it's the Boxing Bay tsunami response
where we had three hercs and a 7, 7, 5, 7
and a, a whole, um,
contingent of Defense force.
People go away at a day
or two days notice to deployments, to Somalia, um,
other responses around the Pacific.
And things happen at this time of year.
So we need to be ready for that. We hope they don't.
Um, but if they do, we are ready.
And those that aren't involved will no doubt get
a much deserved break.
But, um, it's been a big year
and we need to get ready for next year.
That's the primary thing, to spend time with family,
hanau friends, recharge, use your leave
and get ready for an even bigger year next year.
Thank you very much. CDFI think
that's a good note to finish on.
Uh, can I thank you as well for defense for your time?
Very good today and for the wider teams contribution.
Well, much appreciated.
And finally, can I, uh, take the liberty on behalf
of the committee of, uh, extending our thanks
and appreciation to all current personnel, uh,
for their ongoing service to New Zealand,
whatever it may be, and not knowing
what that is from day to day.
Appreciate that service and support
and indeed to the veterans community as well.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.
All right. That brings me in to be hearing
for New Zealand Defense Force.